An earnest conjuration from the King,
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
ACT 2
ALL  Armed, my lord.
ALL  My lord, from head to foot.
ALL  Our duty to your Honor.
ALL  Treason, treason!
ALL  We do, my lord.
Absent thee from felicity awhile
According to the phrase or the addition
AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
All my smooth body.
And a most instant tetter barked about,
A double blessing is a double grace.
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
And call the noblest to the audience.
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
All but Hamlet exit.]
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
And each particular hair to stand an end,
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
And for the day confined to fast in fires
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
And hears it roar beneath.
And how, and who, what means, and where they
And hurt my brother.
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
And it must follow, as the night the day,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
And makes each petty arture in this body
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
And prey on garbage.
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And there assume some other horrible form
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
And thy commandment all alone shall live
And recks not his own rede.
And these few precepts in thy memory
And they in France of the best rank and station
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
And to the manner born, it is a custom
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
All given to mine ear.
And all we mourn for.
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
All may be well.	[He kneels.]
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
And, like a man to double business bound,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
A combination and a form indeed
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
ACT 1
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]
A Lord
And do such bitter business as the day
All but Hamlet exit.]
And I am sick at heart.
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
ALL  Gentlemen!
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
And either ... the devil or throw him out
Affront Ophelia.
And, as I think, they have already order
And drive his purpose into these delights.
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Against the which a moiety competent
And carriage of the article designed,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
And I the matter will reword, which madness
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
And can you by no drift of conference
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
ACT 3
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
And even the like precurse of feared events,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
And foreign mart for implements of war,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
And he to England shall along with you.
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
And let us once again assail your ears,
And live the purer with the other half!
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
And more above, hath his solicitings,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
And not have strewed thy grave.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
And our affairs from England come too late.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
An understanding simple and unschooled.
And passion in the gods.
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
And put it in his pocket--
And so he goes to heaven,
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
And reason panders will.
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And sure I am two men there is not living
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
And tell you what I know.
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
And prologue to the omen coming on,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
And then it started like a guilty thing
And there I see such black and grained spots
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
And to the last bended their light on me.
And vanished from our sight.
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
And we did think it writ down in our duty
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Appears before them and with solemn march
Armed, say you?
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
As are companions noted and most known
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
Answer, and think upon this business.
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
As kill a king?
As it doth well appear unto our state)
A little more than kin and less than kind.
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
As therein are set down.
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
As to peace-parted souls.
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.
A truant disposition, good my lord.
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
BARNARDO
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.
BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
And will not let belief take hold of him
And will not wrong it.
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
And with a larger tether may he walk
And with a look so piteous in purport
And with no less nobility of love
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
As England was his faithful tributary,
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
Are joyfully returned.
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
As by lot, God wot
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As fits a king's remembrance.
As from the body of contraction plucks
As harbingers preceding still the fates
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
As he in his particular act and place
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
As if increase of appetite had grown
As he is very potent with such spirits,
As if he had been loosed out of hell
As infinite as man may undergo,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
As it hath used to do, that I have found
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Ay, madam, it is common.
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!
A flourish for the Players.]
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
A march afar off and shot within.]
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
A royal knavery--an exact command,
A sable silvered.
Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
A station like the herald Mercury
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
A very very--pajock.
As low as to the fiends!
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
As the indifferent children of the earth.
BARNARDO  'Tis here.
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
As of a man faithful and honorable.
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
A villain kills my father, and for that,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
As oft as any passions under heaven
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
BARNARDO
BARNARDO  Last night of all,
BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.
BARNARDO
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
BARNARDO
BARNARDO  Well, good night.
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
BARNARDO  Who's there?
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Been struck so to the soul that presently
Before my God, I might not this believe
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
As if it some impartment did desire
As it is common for the younger sort
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As of a father; for let the world take note,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?
As to expend your time with us awhile
BARNARDO
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
BARNARDO  He.
BARNARDO  Long live the King!
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
Being a thing immortal as itself?
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
But, better looked into, he truly found
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
But as we often see against some storm
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
BARNARDO
Be ruled. You shall not go.
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
But I do prophesy th' election lights
But I have that within which passes show,
But do not go with it.
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
But if the gods themselves did see her then
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
But in our circumstance and course of thought
But let this same be presently performed
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
But this eternal blazon must not be
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
But truly I do fear it.
But you must know your father lost a father,
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
But, to my mind, though I am native here
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
But it reserved some quantity of choice
But keep a farm and carters.
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
But let me hear from you.
But let that go.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
But never doubt I love.
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
But to confront the visage of offense?
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
But to recover of us, by strong hand
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
By indirections find directions out.
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
CORNELIUS
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
Characters in the Play
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
Come.
Come, some music!
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Courtiers at the Danish court:
DOCTOR
Denmark.
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
Did nothing.
Did you not speak to it?
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Doctor of Divinity
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
By this encompassment and drift of question
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
DOCTOR  No more be done.
Does by their own insinuation grow.
But with much forcing of his disposition.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
By laborsome petition, and at last
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Cornelius.]
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Could not with all their quantity of love
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Danish soldiers:
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Denmark?
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Do not, my lord.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
Dost know this waterfly?
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Elsinore?
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
As will not leave their tinct.
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
But he's an arrant knave.
But you'll be secret?
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]
Come hither, gentlemen,
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
Enter Ophelia.]
Enter Osric.]
Enter Osric, a courtier.]
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
For he himself is subject to his birth.
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
Enter Queen and Polonius.]
Enter a Lord.]
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]
Enter the Players.]
Enter the Players with recorders.]
FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
For every man hath business and desire,
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
For food and diet to some enterprise
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
For your desire to know what is between us,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.
GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.
GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.
GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
Give me one poor request.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?
HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
Ghost exits.]
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?
HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.
HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]
HAMLET  How if I answer no?
HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?
HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
HAMLET  I would I had been there.
HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
FIRST PLAYER
FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO  Barnardo?
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]
Forcing him to drink the poison.]
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
From our achievements, though performed at
Ghost beckons.]
Give him the cup.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
GUILDENSTERN
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?
HAMLET  Ecstasy?
HAMLET  From top to toe?
HAMLET  Good madam.
HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
HAMLET
HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?
HAMLET  In happy time.
HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
HAMLET  I embrace it freely
HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
HAMLET  Is 't possible?
HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
HAMLET  Nay, I know not.
HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.
FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?
FIRST PLAYER
FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?
FORTINBRAS
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO  Give you good night.
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
For if the King like not the comedy,
Francisco exits.]
From me, whose love was of that dignity
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
GHOST  My hour is almost come
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
GHOST  I find thee apt;
GHOST
Give us the foils. Come on.
HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
Ghost and Hamlet exit.]
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
Good my lord, tell it.
Guildenstern, and Lords.]
HAMLET  Come on, sir.
HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
HAMLET  Murder?
HAMLET  Nay, but to live
Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--
HAMLET  Hold off your hands.
HAMLET  Judgment!
HAMLET  Nay, come again.
HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
HAMLET
HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Of him, sir.
HAMLET
HAMLET  My fate cries out
HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.
HAMLET  No, by this hand.
HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.
HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
Giving them a paper.]
Giving to you no further personal power
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
HAMLET
HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
HAMLET  Pale or red?
HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?
HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]
HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--
HAMLET
HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?
HAMLET, [aside]
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
HAMLET  So be it.
HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?
HAMLET  Whose was it?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Why?
HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?
HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
HAMLET  Why,
HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?
HAMLET  What hour now?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?
HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  What's his weapon?
HAMLET, [to Laertes]
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.
HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.
HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
HAMLET
HAMLET  I will.
HAMLET
HAMLET  O God!
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!
HAMLET  A whole one, I.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  This?
HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
HAMLET  One.
HAMLET  Why,
HORATIO  Heavens secure him!
HORATIO
HAMLET
HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!
HAMLET  O, wonderful!
HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.
HORATIO
HORATIO  A piece of him.
HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.
HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.
HORATIO  That can I.
HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.
HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
HORATIO
HAMLET  What?
HORATIO  Half a share.
HORATIO  Never believe it.
HORATIO  No, by no means.
HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.
HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!
HORATIO
HORATIO  E'en so.
HORATIO  I did very well note him.
HORATIO  I warrant it will.
HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
HORATIO  Is it a custom?
HORATIO
HORATIO  Is 't possible?
HORATIO  My lord, my lord!
HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--
HORATIO
HORATIO  That is most
HORATIO
HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.
HORATIO  Very well, my lord.
HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  What's that, my lord?
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  What news, my lord?
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  You might have rhymed.
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
Hamlet.
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Hamlet exits.]
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Hamlet exits.]
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Have of your audience been most free and
Have you so slander any moment leisure
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
He closes with you in this consequence:
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
Here's to thy health.
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
He exits.]
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]
He falls.]
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
Heaven will direct it.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
He writes.]
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
Hold you the watch tonight?
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
How does the Queen?
How is 't, my noble lord?
FRANCISCO
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
For Hecuba!
For by the image of my cause I see
For he was likely, had he been put on,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
For out o' doors he went without their helps
For this effect defective comes by cause.
For they are actions that a man might play;
For the supply and profit of our hope,
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
For what we know must be and is as common
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
From the first corse till he that died today,
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.
GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--
GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
Gentlemen
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
HAMLET
HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  But where was this?
HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
HAMLET
HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
HAMLET  Between who?
HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
Ghost exits.]
God bless you, sir.
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
Guildenstern and Attendants.]
HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?
HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.
Ghost exits.]
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
HAMLET, [advancing]
HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.
HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
HAMLET
HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!
HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
HAMLET  Into my grave?
HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?
HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
HAMLET  With drink, sir?
HAMLET
HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
HAMLET  Upon what ground?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.
HAMLET  'Tis very strange.
HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
HAMLET
HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.
HAMLET
HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
HAMLET  What's the matter now?
HAMLET
HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?
HORATIO
HORATIO  'Tis here.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
HAMLET  How "strangely"?
HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
HAMLET
HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.
HAMLET  I pray you.
HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.
HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.
HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
HAMLET  Why he more than another?
HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
HAMLET
HAMLET
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
HORATIO  How was this sealed?
HAMLET  Words, words, words.
HORATIO
HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
HORATIO
HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.
HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.
HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  My lord, I did,
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]
Hamlet the Dane.
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
HAMLET  How came he mad?
HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
HAMLET  Saw who?
HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.
HAMLET  Such an act
HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.
HAMLET  The King my father?
HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.
HAMLET  Or like a whale.
HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
HAMLET  You are welcome.
HORATIO
HAMLET  I do beseech you.
HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
HORATIO  I beseech you.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.
HORATIO  What is it you would see?
HORATIO
HORATIO  Not from his
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Handing him a paper.]
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
He never gave commandment for their death.
High on a stage be placed to the view,
HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?
HAMLET
HORATIO
HORATIO  Friends to this ground.
Hamlet,
HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.
He falls to such perusal of my face
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
His access to me.
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
How these things came about. So shall you hear
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
I do receive your offered love like love
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
I did repel his letters and denied
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
I have a voice and precedent of peace
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
I have sworn 't.
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
I'll visit you.
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
I pray you pass with your best violence.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]
I will go pray.
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
If it assume my noble father's person,
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
If with too credent ear you list his songs
In honorable fashion--
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
Is by a forged process of my death
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
KING, [aside]
KING
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
KING  Gertrude, do not drink.
KING  Give me some light. Away!
KING
KING
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
KING  I do not think 't.
KING  She swoons to see them bleed.
LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]
LAERTES  He is justly served.
LAERTES  No.
It beckons you to go away with it
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
It was as I have seen it in his life,
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.
It waves you to a more removed ground.
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING  Part them. They are incensed.
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
LAERTES
LAERTES  Come, one for me.
LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]
LAERTES, [aside]
LAERTES  Have at you now!
LAERTES  Well, again.
LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
LAERTES  O, fear me not.
LAERTES
LAERTES  Think it no more.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES, [to Claudius]
LAERTES  You mock me, sir.
LAERTES, her brother
LAERTES
LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.
LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.
MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
Mark me.
May sweep to my revenge.
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
More honored in the breach than the observance.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.
MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.
Mad for thy love?
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
March within.]
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
Most constantly.
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
My custom always of the afternoon,
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
Must render up myself.
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
My lord, I have.
My lord, I'll hit him now.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
My tables--meet it is I set it down
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Here in the lobby.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
If circumstances lead me, I will find
In further evil?
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I will take my leave of you.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
I would not hear your enemy say so,
It will be short. The interim's mine,
KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?
Into the madness wherein now he raves
It must be shortly known to him from England
KING  How may we try it further?
KING  Not that I know.
KING
KING  We will try it.
King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
Let me be no assistant for a state,
MARCELLUS  My good lord.
MARCELLUS
Marcellus?
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
Have you any further trade with us?
He gives a paper.]
He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
He reads the letter.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
If I had played the desk or table-book
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
I shall not look upon his like again.
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--
KING
I doubt it is no other but the main--
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Into a tow'ring passion.
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
It lifted up its head and did address
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
KING  But how hath she received his love?
KING
KING
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
KING
Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
My father's brother, but no more like my father
My father--methinks I see my father.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
KING  It likes us well,
MARCELLUS
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Most welcome home!
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
My lord, the King your father.
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
Nay, come, let's go together.
Nay, very pale.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
No, my good lord, but as you did command
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
No more.
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]
Not when I saw 't.
Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
Now wears his crown.
OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  No more but so?
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.
OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
Not of that dye which their investments show,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?
OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.
OSRIC
OSRIC
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--
OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
OSRIC  Of Laertes?
OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.
OSRIC  Sir?
OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]
OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!
OSRIC  Nothing neither way.
OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?
OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Of general assault.
Of his affection to me.
Of his behavior.
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
Of man and country--
On plots and errors happen.
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
O most pernicious woman!
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
On such regards of safety and allowance
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
Osric to put on his hat.]
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Our son shall win.
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.
POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?
Have you forgot me?
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
He exits.]
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
He hath not failed to pester us with message
He likewise gives a frock or livery
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
How in my words somever she be shent,
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
In filial obligation for some term
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
Horatio exits.]
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
It came to pass, as most like it was--
In obstinate condolement is a course
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
His silence will sit drooping.
I hear him coming.
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I'll rant as well as thou.
I think it be no other but e'en so.
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
In the same figure like the King that's dead.
In what particular thought to work I know not,
KING  Pluck them asunder.
KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
KING
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
MARCELLUS
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
KING
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Most free in his reply.
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Niggard of question, but of our demands
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
No more, sweet Hamlet!
He exits.]
He exits.]
He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Help, ho!
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
He sheathes his sword.]
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
In general synod take away her power,
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
I should have fatted all the region kites
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
In noise so rude against me?
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
If there be any good thing to be done
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Is thought-sick at the act.
It is offended.
It spreads his arms.]
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
It would be spoke to.
KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!
KING
LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
LAERTES  O, treble woe
Leaps in the grave.]
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Look here upon this picture and on this,
MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?
MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
Is not this something more than fantasy?
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Now I am alone.
Now falls on Priam.
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
No.
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
O vengeance!
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
O, I am slain!
Of blue Olympus.
Of his true state.
Of mine own eyes.
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
Over the nasty sty!
O'er this solidity and compound mass
I must be cruel only to be kind.
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
Importing the surrender of those lands
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
In that and all things will we show our duty.
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
Is the main motive of our preparations,
KING
KING
KING
KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
KING
King's jester.
LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
Lest with this piteous action you convert
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
I will bestow him and will answer well
In the corrupted currents of this world,
KING
LAERTES  My dread lord,
Laertes,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
Most holy and religious fear it is
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O, say!
O, speak!
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Of these dilated articles allow.
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
One fair daughter, and no more,
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
O, throw away the worser part of it,
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
One word more, good lady.
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Out of his brows.
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!
POLONIUS
POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.
POLONIUS  Come, sirs.
POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.
POLONIUS  Upon my honor--
POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
POLONIUS  This is too long.
POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?
Play something like the murder of my father
POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.
POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.
POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Pointing to Polonius.]
Polonius exits.]
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
Polonius hides behind the arras.]
Pray you, be round with him.
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
Is very cunning in.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
KING
KING
KING
KING
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
LAERTES
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.
MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.
MARCELLUS
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
Must there no more be done?
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
My head should be struck off.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
Not shriving time allowed.
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.
POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
POLONIUS  Very like a whale.
QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.
QUEEN
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
POLONIUS  I will say so.
Passing through nature to eternity.
QUEEN  Did he receive you well?
QUEEN
QUEEN  Ay me, what act
QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?
QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!
QUEEN  No more!
QUEEN
QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN
QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.
QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.
QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?
QUEEN
QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?
QUEEN
QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
QUEEN
QUEEN
Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Of bell and burial.
Of mighty opposites.
O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.
POLONIUS
O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  What said he?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  What do you think of me?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.
POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
POLONIUS  I have, my lord.
POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?
POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?
POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.
POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Perpend.
POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Pleasant and helpful to him!
Polonius exits.]
Polonius.]
Polonius exits.]
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
QUEEN  Ay, amen!
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Put your dread pleasures more into command
QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
Prepare to play.]
QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.
ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
Scene 3
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
Scene 4
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?
Rebellious hell,
Speak to her, Hamlet.
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
QUEEN  More matter with less art.
REYNALDO  Good my lord.
REYNALDO
REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO  Well, my lord.
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
QUEEN
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
QUEEN
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
QUEEN
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Scene 5
Richer than that which four successive kings
QUEEN
REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.
REYNALDO  But, my good lord--
QUEEN  It may be, very like.
QUEEN  So he does indeed.
REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.
REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
REYNALDO  I will, my lord.
REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.
REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.
REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.
She lifts the cup.]
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
Sir, in this audience
So oft it chances in particular men
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
So by my former lecture and advice
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
To tell my story.
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
Shall in the general censure take corruption
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.
Scene 4
Scene 1
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
Than your particular demands will touch it.
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Swear by my sword
Swear by my sword.
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
So bloodily hast struck?
So horridly to shake our disposition
So levied as before, against the Polack,
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Scene 2
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Stick fiery off indeed.
That thou so many princes at a shot
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Some little time, so by your companies
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
So much from th' understanding of himself
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Than to entreaty.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
That, being of so young days brought up with him
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
This warlike volley.
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
Till by some elder masters of known honor
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
knows,
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
With a sore distraction. What I have done
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
about my heart. But it is no matter.
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
head.
hits.
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
nature will.
now.
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
take longer time.
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
turn.
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.
them through and through the most fanned
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
me!
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
The Queen falls.]
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?
work.	[Hurts the King.]
Treachery! Seek it out.
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
mischance
more.
Truly deliver.
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
You know the wager?
ordnance are shot off.]
Why does the drum come hither?
Trumpets the while.]
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
Where should we have our thanks?
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
mouth,
QUEEN  O my son, what theme?
QUEEN  This is mere madness;
Scene 2
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Season your admiration for a while
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
So excellent a king, that was to this
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
Thou knowest already.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
What is the issue of the business there.
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
To let this canker of our nature come
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
QUEEN
QUEEN  If it be,
QUEEN
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Rough-hew them how we will--
Scene 2
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
Th' effect of what I wrote?
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
Than that which dearest father bears his son
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
This grave shall have a living monument.
To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
They exit.]
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
To mine own room again, making so bold
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
What is the reason that you use me thus?
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
Such was the very armor he had on
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
ROSENCRANTZ
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
Sailors
THE GHOST
Scene 1
So please you, something touching the Lord
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
Scene 3
She scatters flowers.]
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
The devil take thy soul!
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
We should profane the service of the dead
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
What is he whose grief
When thou liest howling.
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
are spent.
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
conscience
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
head.
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
my complexion.
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
northerly.
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--
twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
Whose do you think it was?
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
Without debatement further, more or less,
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
You do remember all the circumstance?
all "impawned," as you call it?
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
certain.
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
ere you had done.
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
fashion i' th' earth?
in trial.
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
her.
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
is--
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
matter there.
night's speech.
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
nothing more.
of very liberal conceit.
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
safely,
damned
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
the men are as mad as he.
this gentleman?
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
three-and-twenty years.
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
thyself,
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
year.
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
us
so.
unfellowed.
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
were to know himself.
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
About the world have times twelve thirties been
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
Enter Horatio.]
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]
Enter the Player King and Queen.]
For what advancement may I hope from thee
For women fear too much, even as they love,
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
HAMLET
HAMLET  As woman's love.
HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
But what we do determine oft we break.
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
For husband shalt thou--
And, after, we will both our judgments join
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And could of men distinguish, her election
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
Enter Prologue.]
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
Even with the very comment of thy soul
For us and for our tragedy,
Get you a place.
HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?
HAMLET  Nothing.
HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?
HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
And never come mischance between us twain.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Enter Lucianus.]
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Claudius rises.]
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
HAMLET  If she should break it now!
Directly seasons him his enemy.
HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?
HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.
HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
HAMLET  That's wormwood!
HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
In censure of his seeming.
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
KING, [advancing with Polonius]
KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?
HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?
HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!
HAMLET  Who, I?
Haply the seas, and countries different,
HAMLET  What did you enact?
Here stooping to your clemency,
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
HORATIO
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.
KING  What do you call the play?
LUCIANUS
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
O, my dear lord--
OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.
PLAYER KING
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
I have in quick determination
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
OPHELIA  Still better and worse.
OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?
I do believe you think what now you speak,
In second husband let me be accurst.
KING  It shall be so.
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!
OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.
OPHELIA  The King rises.
OPHELIA  What is, my lord?
OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.
OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
OPHELIA  No, my lord.
OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
PLAYER KING
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Sound a flourish.]
PROLOGUE
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Players exit.]
Pours the poison in his ears.]
QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
QUEEN  How fares my lord?
POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
PLAYER KING
PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Scene 2
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
PLAYER KING
PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
POLONIUS
Players exit.]
Player Queen exits.]
POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.
QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
So far from cheer and from your former state,
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
None wed the second but who killed the first.
PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
PLAYER QUEEN
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
And pious action we do sugar o'er
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
Enter Hamlet.]
HAMLET
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
Must give us pause. There's the respect
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
O heavy burden!
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
POLONIUS
ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
POLONIUS
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
And thus the native hue of resolution
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
Be all my sins remembered.
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
HAMLET  Are you fair?
But that the dread of something after death,
HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?
HAMLET
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.
How does your Honor for this many a day?
HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
I pray you now receive them.
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  At home, my lord.
OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
OPHELIA  Good my lord,
OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.
OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  My lord?
OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?
ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.
ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
ROSENCRANTZ
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
She is a strumpet. What news?
Take these again, for to the noble mind
QUEEN  I shall obey you.
Queen exits.]
ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
QUEEN  What shall I do?
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.
ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.
ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?
Scene 1
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
So, proceed you.
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
ACT 5
ACT 4
ALL  No, let's come in!
Alack and fie for shame,
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
ALL  We will, we will.
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
After the thing it loves.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but the King exit.]
All from her father's death, and now behold!
And, as the world were now but to begin,
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
All flaxen was his poll.
All in the morning betime,
Among a mineral of metals base,
And I a maid at your window,
And bear it to the chapel.
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
And break your own neck down.
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
And dupped the chamber door,
And call it accident.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
And for your rapier most especial,
And his sandal shoon.
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
An thou hadst not come to my bed."
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
And gave you such a masterly report
And gem of all the nation.
And hath abatements and delays as many
And hath shipped me into the land,
And in his grave rained many a tear.
And in this brainish apprehension kills
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
And let him know so.
And let them know both what we mean to do
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
And set a double varnish on the fame
And so have I a noble father lost,
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
And that I see, in passages of proof,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
A face without a heart?
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
And that our drift look through our bad
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
And what's untimely done. ...
And we cast away moan.
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
As if I had never been such.
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
As level as the cannon to his blank
But I will delve one yard below their mines
But age with his stealing steps
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
But that I know love is begun by time
Christian burial.
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]
For and a shrouding sheet,
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
For art and exercise in your defense,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
For such a guest is meet.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.
GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.
GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
HAMLET
HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
HAMLET
HORATIO  Ay, my lord.
HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
He digs up a skull.]
HORATIO  It might, my lord.
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
I bought an unction of a mountebank
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
He digs up more skulls.]
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
As make your bouts more violent to that end)
As one incapable of her own distress
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Bestow this place on us a little while.
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
Enter Gravedigger and Another.]
Christian burial.
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Come short of what he did.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Enter Queen.]
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
Good night, mother.
Guildenstern.]
His liberty is full of threats to all--
I ha 't!
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
In youth when I did love, did love,
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
It had been so with us, had we been there.
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
It may be death.
I must to England, you know that.
It will be laid to us, whose providence
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING  A Norman.
KING
KING  He made confession of you
LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.
KING  It falls right.
LAERTES  A Norman was 't?
LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?
KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
KING  O Gertrude, come away!
KING  The very same.
KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.
LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?
KING  O heavy deed!
LAERTES  Why ask you this?
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
KING  Let's further think of this,
LAERTES
LAERTES  I will do 't,
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
Methought it was very sweet
More than in words?
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Not that I think you did not love your father,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Now out of this--
OTHER  Go to!
OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
OTHER  Was he a gentleman?
OTHER  Why, he had none.
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
No more to undertake it, I will work him
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.
O, a pit of clay for to be made
Of the unworthiest siege.
OTHER  But is this law?
OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.
OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.
OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--
OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
Or like a creature native and endued
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
QUEEN
QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.
QUEEN
O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.
QUEEN  Alack,
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
Requite him for your father.
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
Scene 1
Scene 1
Scene 2
Should have a back or second that might hold
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
That I essentially am not in madness,
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
That I might be the organ.
As day does to your eye.
Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
At his head a grass-green turf,
At his heels a stone.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
A noise within:] "Let her come in!"
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
A noise within.]
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
Bring him before us.
A noise within.]
A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
But not where I have aimed them.
By Cock, they are to blame.
As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
But not by him.
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
By desperate appliance are relieved
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
By his cockle hat and staff
By letters congruing to that effect,
CAPTAIN
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.
CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.
CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.
CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]
CAPTAIN
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Enter King and Laertes.]
Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Come, for England.	[He exits.]
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
England.
Can you advise me?
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Enter King and two or three.]
Enter Ophelia.]
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Rosencrantz.]
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]
Farewell, dear mother.
Fare you well, my dove.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]
Enter Laertes with others.
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
Enter Horatio and others.]
Enter King.]
Enter Ophelia distracted.]
Enter a Messenger.]
Enter Sailors.]
FORTINBRAS
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Enter a Messenger with letters.]
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
For England.
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
Fortinbras.
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
From another one?
For such a guest is meet.
GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
GENTLEMAN
GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.
GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?
Gertrude.--
Gives me superfluous death.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
HAMLET  Safely stowed.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
HAMLET
HAMLET
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
Give me my father!
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
HAMLET  For England?
HAMLET  Good.
HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?
HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]
HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
HAMLET
HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?
HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
HAMLET
Go to thy deathbed.
God 'a mercy on his soul.
HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
HAMLET  At supper.
HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
HAMLET  Do not believe it.
HAMLET  How long is that since?
HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.
HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
HAMLET  What woman then?
HAMLET
HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?
HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?
HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.
HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?
HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.
HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?
He is gone, he is gone,
His means of death, his obscure funeral
I pray you, go with me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
KING  At supper where?
KING
KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
KING
LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?
LAERTES  Let this be so.
KING  So you shall,
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.
SAILOR  God bless you, sir.
He never will come again.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
He that thou knowest thine,
His beard was as white as snow,
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
How now? What news?
It could not move thus.
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
How now, what hath befallen?
I could not but by her. The other motive
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
If you desire to know the certainty
It sends some precious instance of itself
It warms the very sickness in my heart
KING  Alas, alas!
KING  Ay, Hamlet.
KING  Good Laertes,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
KING  If it be so, Laertes
KING  Laertes, you shall hear
KING
KING
KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?
KING  Let him demand his fill.
KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.
KING  Dead.
KING  O, for two special reasons,
KING
KING
KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
KING
KING
LAERTES
KING  What dost thou mean by this?
KING  Where is Polonius?
KING  Who shall stay you?
KING  Will you know them, then?
KING  Why, now you speak
LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
LAERTES  Where is my father?
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
LAERTES
LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?
LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
LAERTES
LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.
Most throughly for my father.
LAERTES
LAERTES  None but his enemies.
My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
OPHELIA [sings]
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
Pursued my life.
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
Or not at all.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
QUEEN
Repast them with my blood.
Scene 7
Scene 3
KING  But where is he?
LAERTES
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
LAERTES  Know you the hand?
MESSENGER
MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
LAERTES
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
No, no, he is dead.
OPHELIA [sings]
O, here they come.
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
ROSENCRANTZ
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Of him that brought them.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
That I am guiltless of your father's death
Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Scene 6
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
So criminal and so capital in nature,
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Speak, man.
That I have longed long to redeliver.
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
That he which hath your noble father slain
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
That I must call 't in question.
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
That are so fortified against our story,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
That ever I was born to set it right!
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
That from her working all his visage wanned,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
That makes calamity of so long life.
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
That our devices still are overthrown;
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
That he is open to incontinency;
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Th' important acting of your dread command?
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
That she should lock herself from his resort,
That show of such an exercise may color
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
That's the end.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
That thus he suffers for.
HORATIO
He answers:
He is dead and gone;
How should I your true love know
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
Her brother is in secret come from France,
He exits.]
He exits.]
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
How all occasions do inform against me
Horatio exits.]
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
If his chief good and market of his time
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
Indeed would make one think there might be
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Is not to stir without great argument,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
KING  Attend!
KING  Conceit upon her father.
KING  How do you, pretty lady?
KING  How long hath she been thus?
KING  Pretty Ophelia--
KING
KING  The doors are broke.
KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.
KING
KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
LAERTES
LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.
LAERTES
LAERTES
Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
Larded all with sweet flowers;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
Never departed more.
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
Of my true mother.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
OPHELIA [sings]
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.
QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.
QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?
OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
Or for some frontier?
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
Oh, ho!
QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?
QUEEN
QUEEN  I will not speak with her.
QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--
QUEEN  What would she have?
Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
Scene 5
QUEEN
ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?
Scene 4
Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--
Looking before and after, gave us not
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
That capability and godlike reason
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
That was and is the question of these wars.
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we find out the cause of this effect,
That, if again this apparition come,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
The canker galls the infants of the spring
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
That hath in it no profit but the name.
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
There, my lord.
There is a play tonight before the King.
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
Therefore I have entreated him along
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
The hart ungalled play.
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
That to the use of actions fair and good
That treason can but peep to what it would,
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
That your good beauties be the happy cause
That youth and observation copied there,
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
The Other Man exits
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
The bell then beating one--
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
The better to beguile. This is for all:
They exit.]
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
The devil himself.
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The leprous distilment, whose effect
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
The need we have to use you did provoke
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
The ratifiers and props of every word,
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
The safety and the health of this whole state.
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
They enter with Hamlet.]
They exit.]
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
The terms of our estate may not endure
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
The triumph of his pledge.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
This above all: to thine own self be true,
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
The insolence of office, and the spurns
The instances that second marriage move
The instant burst of clamor that she made
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
The origin and commencement of his grief
The inward service of the mind and soul
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
They shall go far with little.
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
The single and peculiar life is bound
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
This sudden sending him away must seem
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
There is a willow grows askant the brook
There lives within the very flame of love
Therefore, let's follow.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
These hands are not more like.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
The head is not more native to the heart,
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
The rather if you could devise it so
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
The lists, and full proportions are all made
The light and careless livery that it wears
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
The unseen good old man.
This man shall set me packing.
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
This marvel to you.
This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This present object made probation.
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
This unprevailing woe and think of us
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Thus didst thou."
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To business with the King more than the scope
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
To give these mourning duties to your father.
To him from whom you brought them.
To make it truster of your own report
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
To put an antic disposition on)
To show my duty in your coronation,
To let you know of it.
To muddy death.
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
To show yourself indeed your father's son
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
Upon my life, Lamord.
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
We must with all our majesty and skill
We should do when we would; for this "would"
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
We would not understand what was most fit,
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
When down her weedy trophies and herself
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
When in your motion you are hot and dry
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
Together with that fair and warlike form
Tis strange.
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
To be your Valentine.
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
To give it due content.
To his confine, and of the truth herein
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
To his own scandal.
To his unmastered importunity.
To offer it the show of violence,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
To tell us this.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
To those of mine.
To what I shall unfold.
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
To you alone.
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
Two Messengers
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
Upon my sword.
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
VOLTEMAND
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
We cannot get from him.
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
What I have said to you.
We shall express our duty in his eye;
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
What is the matter?
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
What think you on 't?
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
What does this mean, my lord?
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
What we have two nights seen.
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Where is your son?
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
While one with moderate haste might tell a
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Where, my lord?
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Which bewept to the ground did not go
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
The violence of either grief or joy
The which he loved passing well.
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
They withdraw.]
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
This night to play before him.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
This realm dismantled was
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
Thy natural magic and dire property
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Thus runs the world away.
Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
Tis too narrow for your mind.
To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
To be or not to be--that is the question:
To both your honors.
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
To keep those many many bodies safe
To give the world assurance of a man.
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
To hear and see the matter.
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
Welcome, my good friends.
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
When he himself might his quietus make
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
When we would bring him on to some confession
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
To hear him so inclined.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
To take him in the purging of his soul,
To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
VOLTEMAND
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
When it proved otherwise?
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
Which was declining on the milky head
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
This bodiless creation ecstasy
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
To England send him, or confine him where
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
To be commanded.
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
Tis now the very witching time of night,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
To lay our service freely at your feet,
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
To heaven.
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
To punish me with this and this with me,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Upon whose property and most dear life
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
Well, we shall sift him.
We may of their encounter frankly judge
What majesty should be, what duty is,
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
To youth and liberty.
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Where every god did seem to set his seal
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where's your father?
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
Which now goes too free-footed.
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Who is 't that can inform me?
Why this same strict and most observant watch
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Why to a public count I might not go
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Will not debate the question of this straw.
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
What company, at what expense; and finding
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
What thou hast said to me.
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
Whose blood and judgment are so well
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Winner and loser?
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
With all the strength and armor of the mind
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Will you be ruled by me?
Will you two help to hasten them?
With all my imperfections on my head.
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Within the center.
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
With true-love showers.
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
Without more motive, into every brain
Without the sensible and true avouch
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
With which she followed my poor father's body,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
Would have reverted to my bow again,
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Yea, from the table of my memory
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Yes, faith, heartily.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
You have been talked of since your travel much,
You mainly were stirred up.
You, as your business and desire shall point you
You are the most immediate to our throne,
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
You cannot call it love, for at your age
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
You come most carefully upon your hour.
You do not understand yourself so clearly
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
You must not put another scandal on him
You must not take for fire. From this time
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Whose violent property fordoes itself
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Why, how now, Hamlet?
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
With heated visage, as against the doom,
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.
With this regard their currents turn awry
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
With variable objects, shall expel
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
You go not till I set you up a glass
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
You promised me to wed."
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]
Your leave and favor to return to France,
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
Your wisdom best shall think.
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
accent and good discretion.
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
about of brains.
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
ache to think on 't.
affair.
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
agreeing,
and more strange return. Hamlet.
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?
all after!
and Lords exit.]
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
and his load too.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
and presently.
and then, you know,
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
bastard,
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
beating. And, when you are asked this question
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
daughter that I love passing well.
deceived.
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
delights not me"?
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
halt for 't. What players are they?
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
hadst thou!
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
hither are they coming to offer you service.
if philosophy could find it out.
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
between
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
blood
body is and go with us to the King.
book,
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
bounteous.
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
closet ere you go to bed.
desert.
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
calf there.--Be the players ready?
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
capons so.
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
changes
choler.
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
come by and by.
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
commeddled
could you not?
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
daughter?
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
edge.
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
distempered.
drowned herself wittingly.
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
easiness.
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
even, sir.--
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
conscience.
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
daughter.
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
eyes.
fee
fellowship in a cry of players?
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
fitted.
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
foe,
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
give you some violets, but they withered all when
grave-maker?
friends.
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
greenly
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
from me to you.
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.
hath the daintier sense.
height,
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
hell,
herself in her own defense?
her soul, she's dead.
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
him
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
except my life, except my life.
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
figure?
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
foolish ear.
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
flattered?
friend, look to 't.
further.
good actor.
heart,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
grown honest.
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
hence
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
hobby-horse is forgot."
hold their course for England; of them I have
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
home;
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
hours.
how express and admirable; in action how like
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
it?
hundred.
if I could see the puppets dallying.
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
journeymen had made men, and not made them
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
might,"
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
know from what part of the world I should be
keep,
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
look upon me,
lost,
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
most beautified Ophelia--
most best, believe it. Adieu.
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
move
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
legs.
letters for you.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
liest.
lord?
love, and by what more dear a better
love is too unmannerly.
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
mine.
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
morning, 'twas then indeed.
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
or so," and "gentleman."
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
own image, and the very age and body of the time
patience.
quaintly
something. Where did I leave?
sound,
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
say,
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
through the arras.]
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
out
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
played once i' th' university, you say?
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
progress through the guts of a beggar.
question of the play be then to be considered.
quickly too. Farewell.
pronounced.
reading.
relish of it. I loved you not.
replication should be made by the son of a king?
shape of a camel?
shall be dry again.
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
that)
them, for there be of them that will themselves
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
this line--let me see, let me see:
tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
speak.
spheres,
sword,
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
than with honesty?
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
that often madness hits on, which reason and
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
the stairs into the lobby.
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
time. After your death you were better have a bad
torches.]
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
truepenny?
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
villain!
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
means of the late innovation.
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
middle of her favors?
might it not?
might it not?
mischief.
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
much to tell thee. Farewell.
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
music. Look you, these are the stops.
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
my father died. They say he made a good end.
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
mother's admiration? Impart.
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
nation
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
noise?
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
reason.
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
so. To me, it is a prison.
speak.
strew
that I have bad dreams.
the author of affection, but called it an honest
the shadow of a dream.
thee.
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.
that's for thoughts.
they ask you what it means, say you this:
thought,
th' worst.
vile king,
them,
true. Let me question more in particular. What
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
which your modesties have not craft enough to
was an actor in Rome--
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
whispers
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
wisdom
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
offense i' th' world.
offense in 't?
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
or a carpenter?"
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
our withers are unwrung.
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
players (as it is most like, if their means are
play.
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
own life.
player went to cuffs in the question.
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
performance,
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
play.
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
with me whether you were sent for or no.
proverb is something musty.
purpose, confess thyself--
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
revenge.
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
shall be the end of my business.
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
received it, and others whose judgments in such
recorders!
sings in grave-making.
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
some frame and start not so wildly from my
stoup of liquor.
struck her into amazement and admiration.
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
them.--
them exclaim against their own succession?
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
them to controversy. There was for a while no
them.
these are the only men.
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
thoughts.
thousand tenants.
together
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
uncle,
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
upon this pipe?
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
with
with some Attendants.]
with the body. The King is a thing--
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
with us, sir.
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
what it means.
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
with you.
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
words are not mine.
would,"
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
word, the word to the action, with this special
you.	[She exits.]
work?
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
your bounty. Take them in.
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
world to drown or hang themselves more than
worm.
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
you both?
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
you?
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
you could go backward.
you down,
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?
you love me, hold not off.
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
you say--
you,
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
your smiling you seem to say so.
you.
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no

GUILDENSTERN
BARNARDO
POLONIUS
FRANCISCO
OPHELIA
FRANCISCO
BARNARDO
POLONIUS
HAMLET
ACT 3
DOCTOR
HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
FIRST PLAYER
HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Enter Ophelia.]
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
BARNARDO
HAMLET
Enter Osric.]
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
Affront Ophelia.
But this eternal blazon must not be
But it reserved some quantity of choice
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Which was declining on the milky head
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
VOLTEMAND
VOLTEMAND
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
CORNELIUS
Come, some music!
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Do not, my lord.
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
Tis too narrow for your mind.
ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Where, my lord?
What does this mean, my lord?
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
Enter a Lord.]
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
Tis strange.
Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
As of a man faithful and honorable.
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
But let this same be presently performed
BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Come.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
To be your Valentine.
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
BARNARDO  'Tis here.
For every man hath business and desire,
OPHELIA
BARNARDO
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
GUILDENSTERN
OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?
GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
OPHELIA  At home, my lord.
BARNARDO  He.
But to confront the visage of offense?
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
As it hath used to do, that I have found
OPHELIA  Good my lord,
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
With all the strength and armor of the mind
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
DOCTOR  No more be done.
BARNARDO  Who's there?
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
Unto that element. But long it could not be
HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
As he in his particular act and place
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And can you by no drift of conference
With all my imperfections on my head.
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
To be commanded.
HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
And carriage of the article designed,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
Be all my sins remembered.
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Which now goes too free-footed.
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
To what I shall unfold.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
A little more than kin and less than kind.
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
OPHELIA  My lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.
To hear him so inclined.
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
Are joyfully returned.
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
We should do when we would; for this "would"
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A sable silvered.
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Upon my sword.
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Elsinore?
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
A truant disposition, good my lord.
As fits a king's remembrance.
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
HAMLET  I would I had been there.
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Being a thing immortal as itself?
BARNARDO  Long live the King!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
When it proved otherwise?
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
As of a father; for let the world take note,
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Did nothing.
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Believe so much in him that he is young,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
For he himself is subject to his birth.
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
Denmark.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
As to expend your time with us awhile
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
Doubt that the sun doth move,
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
We shall express our duty in his eye;
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
To keep those many many bodies safe
Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
When he himself might his quietus make
Appears before them and with solemn march
Why this same strict and most observant watch
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
But that the dread of something after death,
As the indifferent children of the earth.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
A very very--pajock.
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
Denmark?
Given private time to you, and you yourself
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
BARNARDO  Last night of all,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
To take him in the purging of his soul,
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
Upon my life, Lamord.
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.
And to the last bended their light on me.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
To you alone.
ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
As it doth well appear unto our state)
To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
As kill a king?
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Unless things mortal move them not at all)
And reason panders will.
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
This night to play before him.
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
But, better looked into, he truly found
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
What we have two nights seen.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
To his own scandal.
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
But with much forcing of his disposition.
And sure I am two men there is not living
OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
And so he goes to heaven,
This is the very coinage of your brain.
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
As therein are set down.
Be ruled. You shall not go.
GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
FRANCISCO  Barnardo?
HAMLET  How if I answer no?
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
The which he loved passing well.
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
We cannot get from him.
To give the world assurance of a man.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
Ay, madam, it is common.
Where is your son?
We go to gain a little patch of ground
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
And then it started like a guilty thing
Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
As infinite as man may undergo,
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
To offer it the show of violence,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
Why seems it so particular with thee?
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
HAMLET  Is 't possible?
To punish me with this and this with me,
Who is 't that can inform me?
What thou hast said to me.
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
HAMLET  In happy time.
Will you be ruled by me?
To those of mine.
HAMLET  From top to toe?
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
And our affairs from England come too late.
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
But he's an arrant knave.
And not have strewed thy grave.
But never doubt I love.
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
Upon whose property and most dear life
And live the purer with the other half!
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
We may of their encounter frankly judge
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
HAMLET  Good madam.
Well, we shall sift him.
For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
O heavy burden!
Come hither, gentlemen,
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
I pray you now receive them.
Will you two help to hasten them?
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
To heaven.
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
What company, at what expense; and finding
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
But to recover of us, by strong hand
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
But let that go.
HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
Give him the cup.
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Consent to swear.
Doubt truth to be a liar,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.
But you must know your father lost a father,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Where's your father?
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
PROLOGUE
KING
KING
KING
conscience.
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
ACT 1
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
PLAYER KING
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
FRANCISCO
PLAYER KING
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
OPHELIA
HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
You have been talked of since your travel much,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]
Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
hither are they coming to offer you service.
HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
PLAYER KING
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
You promised me to wed."
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
GENTLEMAN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
REYNALDO
HORATIO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HAMLET
HAMLET
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
FIRST PLAYER
FORTINBRAS
FORTINBRAS
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
HAMLET
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?
closet ere you go to bed.
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
Without the sensible and true avouch
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
distempered.
deceived.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.
bastard,
FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
edge.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
commeddled
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
You are the most immediate to our throne,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
blood
You cannot call it love, for at your age
FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.
body is and go with us to the King.
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
agreeing,
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
To muddy death.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
book,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
To him from whom you brought them.
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
With heated visage, as against the doom,
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
Your wisdom best shall think.
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
daughter that I love passing well.
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
To show my duty in your coronation,
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
Within the book and volume of my brain,
HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
accent and good discretion.
twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
You must not take for fire. From this time
ALL  Gentlemen!
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
GHOST  My hour is almost come
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
Whose violent property fordoes itself
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
HAMLET  Nay, come again.
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Give us the foils. Come on.
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
To put an antic disposition on)
and his load too.
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
To business with the King more than the scope
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
capons so.
You mainly were stirred up.
HAMLET  Murder?
To give these mourning duties to your father.
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ACT 2
ACT 5
ACT 4
her soul, she's dead.
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Enter Ophelia.]
time. After your death you were better have a bad
The instant burst of clamor that she made
An thou hadst not come to my bed."
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Gertrude.--
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
For Hecuba!
Enter Ophelia distracted.]
would,"
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Stick fiery off indeed.
morning, 'twas then indeed.
To the unsatisfied.
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Enter King and two or three.]
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Scene 1
Scene 1
Go to thy deathbed.
pronounced.
Scene 4
QUEEN  So he does indeed.
Scene 2
Scene 1
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
KING  O heavy deed!
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.
HAMLET  Safely stowed.
Scene 2
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
Enter King.]
with the body. The King is a thing--
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
And hath shipped me into the land,
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
HAMLET  No, by this hand.
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
England.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
A noise within:] "Let her come in!"
Forcing him to drink the poison.]
A noise within.]
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]
A noise within.]
HAMLET  O God!
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
ROSENCRANTZ
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
HORATIO  My lord, I did,
Come short of what he did.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
For England.
HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.
HAMLET  For England?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
my father died. They say he made a good end.
REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
A march afar off and shot within.]
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
you could go backward.
LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?
HAMLET  A whole one, I.
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
He falls to such perusal of my face
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
I have a voice and precedent of peace
head.
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
HAMLET  How came he mad?
REYNALDO  But, my good lord--
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
KING  She swoons to see them bleed.
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
HORATIO  How was this sealed?
Trumpets the while.]
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
was an actor in Rome--
HORATIO  You might have rhymed.
delights not me"?
Scene 3
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--
LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.
Scene 5
Scene 2
Scene 4
hundred.
Scene 2
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
question of the play be then to be considered.
HAMLET  Pale or red?
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
LAERTES  He is justly served.
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
work.	[Hurts the King.]
Sound a flourish.]
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
His liberty is full of threats to all--
HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--
offense i' th' world.
As make your bouts more violent to that end)
Enter Queen.]
HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?
flattered?
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
ordnance are shot off.]
purpose, confess thyself--
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]
While one with moderate haste might tell a
Rough-hew them how we will--
He digs up a skull.]
All from her father's death, and now behold!
That treason can but peep to what it would,
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
Perpend.
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Scene 2
fitted.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
And each particular hair to stand an end,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]
Guildenstern.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
And, like a man to double business bound,
HORATIO  Friends to this ground.
HAMLET  Upon what ground?
HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
sound,
HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]
HAMLET  Good.
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
HORATIO  That can I.
HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.
HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.
HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
ALL  Armed, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?
HORATIO  My lord, my lord!
HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.
OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.
HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
How is 't, my noble lord?
POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.
lord?
HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.
OPHELIA  No, my lord.
ALL  We do, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?
HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.
OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
OPHELIA  What is, my lord?
OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?
OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
QUEEN  How fares my lord?
There, my lord.
HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.
POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.
POLONIUS  I have, my lord.
REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.
HORATIO  Very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO  Well, my lord.
REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  I will, my lord.
REYNALDO  Good my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?
HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.
POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
HORATIO  What news, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?
LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?
HORATIO  What's that, my lord?
LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?
HORATIO  It might, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.
CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?
HORATIO  Ay, my lord.
HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
Swear by my sword.
OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.
QUEEN  If it be,
HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?
A double blessing is a double grace.
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
The ratifiers and props of every word,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
sword,
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
performance,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.
HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
I pray you pass with your best violence.
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
And call the noblest to the audience.
He closes with you in this consequence:
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
And recks not his own rede.
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
KING, [aside]
HAMLET, [aside]
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
patience.
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
HAMLET  How long is that since?
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
thee.
HORATIO  What is it you would see?
this line--let me see, let me see:
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
own life.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
except my life, except my life.
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
And prey on garbage.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
The triumph of his pledge.
HAMLET  'Tis very strange.
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
revenge.
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
QUEEN  It may be, very like.
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
HORATIO  Is 't possible?
HAMLET  Or like a whale.
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
uncle,
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Bestow this place on us a little while.
By Cock, they are to blame.
KING  The very same.
take longer time.
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
Of the unworthiest siege.
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
I did repel his letters and denied
These hands are not more like.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
They shall go far with little.
Alack and fie for shame,
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.
That hath in it no profit but the name.
QUEEN  O my son, what theme?
All in the morning betime,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
HAMLET  You are welcome.
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
That, if again this apparition come,
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
mine.
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
At his heels a stone.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
That youth and observation copied there,
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
For by the image of my cause I see
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
Can you advise me?
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
me!
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
words are not mine.
OTHER  Why, he had none.
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
foe,
upon this pipe?
HORATIO  Half a share.
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
There is a play tonight before the King.
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?
home;
I pray you, go with me.
His access to me.
HAMLET  One.
From another one?
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
For art and exercise in your defense,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
He never gave commandment for their death.
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?
more.
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
HORATIO  'Tis here.
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
something. Where did I leave?
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
The devil himself.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
And hears it roar beneath.
Here's to thy health.
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
KING  Gertrude, do not drink.
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?
look upon me,
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
Hamlet the Dane.
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
He that thou knowest thine,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
He is gone, he is gone,
HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
It had been so with us, had we been there.
What is the issue of the business there.
figure?
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
The safety and the health of this whole state.
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
KING  At supper where?
Among a mineral of metals base,
herself in her own defense?
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
HAMLET  Into my grave?
HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
Have of your audience been most free and
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
The single and peculiar life is bound
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
That to the use of actions fair and good
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
HAMLET, [advancing]
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
speak.
The need we have to use you did provoke
HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
own image, and the very age and body of the time
The origin and commencement of his grief
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
that often madness hits on, which reason and
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
reading.
replication should be made by the son of a king?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
shape of a camel?
And so, without more circumstance at all,
HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.
ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
quickly too. Farewell.
HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
How does the Queen?
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
shall be dry again.
villain!
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.
If it assume my noble father's person,
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
For he was likely, had he been put on,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
QUEEN  What shall I do?
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
HAMLET  Between who?
HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
HAMLET  Saw who?
HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
Therefore I have entreated him along
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
them through and through the most fanned
Put your dread pleasures more into command
GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
Or like a creature native and endued
By desperate appliance are relieved
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
Swear by my sword
A Lord
GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Sir, in this audience
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
So by my former lecture and advice
O, a pit of clay for to be made
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
Gives me superfluous death.
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
Should have a back or second that might hold
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
work?
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
To England send him, or confine him where
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Fare you well, my dove.
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Farewell, dear mother.
HAMLET  Are you fair?
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.
GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
And with no less nobility of love
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
Shall in the general censure take corruption
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
So oft it chances in particular men
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
If by direct or by collateral hand
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
So much from th' understanding of himself
I bought an unction of a mountebank
His means of death, his obscure funeral
ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
By his cockle hat and staff
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The soldier's music and the rite of war
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
KING  Laertes, you shall hear
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
Some little time, so by your companies
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
An earnest conjuration from the King,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
In youth when I did love, did love,
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
you both?
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
Christian burial.
HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?
KING  If it be so, Laertes
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
you love me, hold not off.
LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.
It may be death.
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
It sends some precious instance of itself
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
No more to undertake it, I will work him
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Richer than that which four successive kings
QUEEN  Alack,
GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
So bloodily hast struck?
KING  So you shall,
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.
OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
nature will.
God 'a mercy on his soul.
But not by him.
worm.
Pleasant and helpful to him!
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
KING  A Norman.
Speak loudly for him.
HAMLET  What woman then?
So much as from occasion you may glean,
OTHER  Was he a gentleman?
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
How now, what hath befallen?
QUEEN  Ay, amen!
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
He never will come again.
Now fear I this will give it start again.
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
Perchance 'twill walk again.
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
your bounty. Take them in.
HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
As day does to your eye.
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
At his head a grass-green turf,
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Rebellious hell,
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Away, for everything is sealed and done
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
But not where I have aimed them.
turn.
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
you down,
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That, being of so young days brought up with him
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
That I might be the organ.
With a sore distraction. What I have done
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
To th' ambassadors of England gives
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
Requite him for your father.
Good night, mother.
So horridly to shake our disposition
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Till by some elder masters of known honor
HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.
HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.
OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.
LAERTES  Let this be so.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
OTHER  Go to!
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
What is the matter?
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
your smiling you seem to say so.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.
Not that I think you did not love your father,
Give me my father!
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
HAMLET  At supper.
As if it some impartment did desire
HAMLET  Come on, sir.
HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
To hear and see the matter.
HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?
SAILOR  God bless you, sir.
CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
Before you visit him, to make inquire
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
For food and diet to some enterprise
HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
affair.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
all after!
with us, sir.
HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?
Winner and loser?
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
Within the center.
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
about my heart. But it is no matter.
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
Before my God, I might not this believe
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Could not with all their quantity of love
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
I could not but by her. The other motive
with
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
And that our drift look through our bad
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
hath the daintier sense.
Th' effect of what I wrote?
A combination and a form indeed
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
OPHELIA  Still better and worse.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
To mine own room again, making so bold
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
Take these again, for to the noble mind
HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
know from what part of the world I should be
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
mischance
The lists, and full proportions are all made
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
fee
noise?
mischief.
sings in grave-making.
if I could see the puppets dallying.
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
This man shall set me packing.
vile king,
HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?
GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
As if I had never been such.
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
mouth,
I do believe you think what now you speak,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
much to tell thee. Farewell.
ALL  We will, we will.
All flaxen was his poll.
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
speak.
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
how express and admirable; in action how like
Christian burial.
And bear it to the chapel.
Season your admiration for a while
Absent thee from felicity awhile
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
hell,
And for your rapier most especial,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
HAMLET  I will.
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.
HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.
HORATIO  I warrant it will.
the shadow of a dream.
HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
most beautified Ophelia--
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
And set a double varnish on the fame
To let this canker of our nature come
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
But that I know love is begun by time
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
received it, and others whose judgments in such
As level as the cannon to his blank
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
And let them know both what we mean to do
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
them.
OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And in this brainish apprehension kills
HORATIO  A piece of him.
HORATIO  Is it a custom?
them,
HORATIO  I did very well note him.
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
So excellent a king, that was to this
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
The unseen good old man.
And we cast away moan.
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
ALL  No, let's come in!
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
these are the only men.
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
And, as the world were now but to begin,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
them exclaim against their own succession?
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.
This present object made probation.
struck her into amazement and admiration.
ALL  Treason, treason!
HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
means of the late innovation.
HAMLET  What's his weapon?
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!
And break your own neck down.
LAERTES  No.
And gem of all the nation.
And his sandal shoon.
reason.
so. To me, it is a prison.
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.
HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Scene 1
The bell then beating one--
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
or so," and "gentleman."
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
In honorable fashion--
HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
Such was the very armor he had on
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
hence
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
our withers are unwrung.
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
HAMLET  O, wonderful!
HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
HORATIO  Heavens secure him!
keep,
OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
All given to mine ear.
players (as it is most like, if their means are
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
player went to cuffs in the question.
And let him know so.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
with me whether you were sent for or no.
foolish ear.
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
KING  It shall be so.
HORATIO  E'en so.
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
HAMLET  The King my father?
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
And in his grave rained many a tear.
twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!
And hurt my brother.
further.
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
grave-maker?
choler.
daughter?
How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Truly deliver.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.
HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
It is a nipping and an eager air.
And all we mourn for.
HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
OPHELIA  The King rises.
QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
So, proceed you.
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
That your good beauties be the happy cause
She is a strumpet. What news?
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?
hold their course for England; of them I have
HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!
progress through the guts of a beggar.
You know the wager?
HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?
HAMLET  With drink, sir?
God bless you, sir.
POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
Than that which dearest father bears his son
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
But age with his stealing steps
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
Why does the drum come hither?
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
HAMLET  Why he more than another?
GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
HAMLET  Of him, sir.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
daughter.
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
Have you so slander any moment leisure
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
HAMLET  Nay, but to live
move
The instances that second marriage move
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Is by a forged process of my death
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
Collected from all simples that have virtue
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
And thy commandment all alone shall live
I do receive your offered love like love
There lives within the very flame of love
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
KING
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OSRIC
OSRIC
KING
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
KING
KING
OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
QUEEN
QUEEN
HORATIO
MESSENGER
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--
KING  Why, now you speak
MARCELLUS
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
word, the word to the action, with this special
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--
KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
world to drown or hang themselves more than
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
KING  Dead.
POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
KING  Pretty Ophelia--
Indeed would make one think there might be
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
On such regards of safety and allowance
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
And that his soul may be as damned and black
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
In the same figure like the King that's dead.
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
Scene 3
Scene 7
Scene 4
Scene 5
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
Where every god did seem to set his seal
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
This realm dismantled was
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
Must give us pause. There's the respect
No, no, he is dead.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
It is offended.
OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Importing the surrender of those lands
Niggard of question, but of our demands
I must be cruel only to be kind.
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
LAERTES  My dread lord,
KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
He sheathes his sword.]
KING  Part them. They are incensed.
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
My father, in his habit as he lived!
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
LAERTES  Know you the hand?
Th' important acting of your dread command?
That's the end.
Not shriving time allowed.
LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
KING  Attend!
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?
It waves you to a more removed ground.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.
Repast them with my blood.
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
MARCELLUS  My good lord.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.
POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?
POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?
MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?
Her brother is in secret come from France,
ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?
LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
Scene 6
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
O vengeance!
OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
More honored in the breach than the observance.
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
LAERTES, [aside]
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
Leaps in the grave.]
That makes calamity of so long life.
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Pursued my life.
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
It was as I have seen it in his life,
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
May sweep to my revenge.
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Of his affection to me.
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
It must be shortly known to him from England
If circumstances lead me, I will find
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
If I had played the desk or table-book
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
There is a willow grows askant the brook
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
With variable objects, shall expel
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
As if he had been loosed out of hell
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Whose blood and judgment are so well
Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
him
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
I will bestow him and will answer well
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
between
But if the gods themselves did see her then
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
As oft as any passions under heaven
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
That he which hath your noble father slain
voice of the King himself for your succession in
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
journeymen had made men, and not made them
You must not put another scandal on him
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
Without more motive, into every brain
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
Which bewept to the ground did not go
Why to a public count I might not go
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
give you some violets, but they withered all when
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And, as I think, they have already order
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
Play something like the murder of my father
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
together
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
KING  But where is he?
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
KING  The doors are broke.
Nay, very pale.
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Most welcome home!
MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
He is dead and gone;
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
And with a larger tether may he walk
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
And pious action we do sugar o'er
And will not let belief take hold of him
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
love, and by what more dear a better
SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
changes
POLONIUS  What said he?
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
O, here they come.
POLONIUS  What do you think of me?
Mark me.
Have you forgot me?
In noise so rude against me?
It will be short. The interim's mine,
POLONIUS  Very like a whale.
King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
LAERTES  Come, one for me.
QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?
QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
Now I am alone.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.
And for the day confined to fast in fires
It is most retrograde to our desire,
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
Never departed more.
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Must there no more be done?
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
As harbingers preceding still the fates
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
KING  But how hath she received his love?
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.
them, for there be of them that will themselves
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
My head should be struck off.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
QUEEN  No more!
No more.
One fair daughter, and no more,
QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
LAERTES  Think it no more.
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
Of his true state.
So criminal and so capital in nature,
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
My lord, I have.
QUEEN  What would she have?
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
I should have fatted all the region kites
POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
I hear him coming.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
His silence will sit drooping.
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Mad for thy love?
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?
KING, [rising]
Must render up myself.
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
POLONIUS  This is too long.
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
O, speak!
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
As from the body of contraction plucks
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
Most holy and religious fear it is
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
Of bell and burial.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.
OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.
Or not at all.
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
No, my good lord, but as you did command
How all occasions do inform against me
If his chief good and market of his time
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
Makes vow before his uncle never more
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
We must with all our majesty and skill
HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
This sudden sending him away must seem
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
Gentlemen
HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
Gravedigger
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
How these things came about. So shall you hear
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
May give his saying deed, which is no further
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Heavens make our presence and our practices
HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
Into the madness wherein now he raves
If with too credent ear you list his songs
HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
HORATIO  Not from his
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
In further evil?
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
To his confine, and of the truth herein
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Now falls on Priam.
KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?
Of him that brought them.
OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Pray you, be round with him.
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
The inward service of the mind and soul
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
Gravedigger's companion
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
Together with that fair and warlike form
But as we often see against some storm
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
When we would bring him on to some confession
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
By this encompassment and drift of question
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
For what we know must be and is as common
OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
As are companions noted and most known
As if increase of appetite had grown
To show yourself indeed your father's son
My father's brother, but no more like my father
HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
Giving to you no further personal power
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
LAERTES, her brother
HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
Speak, man.
O most pernicious woman!
them to controversy. There was for a while no
KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
The rather if you could devise it so
ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
KING  It likes us well,
QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.
On plots and errors happen.
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
QUEEN  Did he receive you well?
KING  Let him demand his fill.
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
Into a tow'ring passion.
Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
The insolence of office, and the spurns
Now wears his crown.
OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
For out o' doors he went without their helps
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
The light and careless livery that it wears
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Two Messengers
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
I doubt it is no other but the main--
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
LAERTES  Well, again.
O, I am slain!
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
My custom always of the afternoon,
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Our son shall win.
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.
So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
No.
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Oh, ho!
nation
MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
According to the phrase or the addition
And thus the native hue of resolution
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
That show of such an exercise may color
KING  Will you know them, then?
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
I shall not look upon his like again.
Is very cunning in.
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
I have in quick determination
HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
If there be any good thing to be done
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
That I must call 't in question.
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
Help, ho!
Why should we in our peevish opposition
beating. And, when you are asked this question
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
I would not hear your enemy say so,
OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
KING  Pluck them asunder.
Most throughly for my father.
LAERTES  Where is my father?
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.
KING  Conceit upon her father.
My lord, the King your father.
Nay, come, let's go together.
QUEEN  I will not speak with her.
My father--methinks I see my father.
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
KING  How may we try it further?
POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Of my true mother.
Or for some frontier?
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
King's jester.
LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.
In filial obligation for some term
That I have longed long to redeliver.
In general synod take away her power,
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.
OSRIC  Sir?
That thus he suffers for.
LAERTES  You mock me, sir.
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
In obstinate condolement is a course
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Of his behavior.
O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
If damned custom have not brazed it so
PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
None wed the second but who killed the first.
In second husband let me be accurst.
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
More relative than this. The play's the thing
That I am guiltless of your father's death
March within.]
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
wisdom
MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
So many journeys may the sun and moon
That capability and godlike reason
And to the manner born, it is a custom
And there assume some other horrible form
And they in France of the best rank and station
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
My tables--meet it is I set it down
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
which your modesties have not craft enough to
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
How does your Honor for this many a day?
OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.
QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Players exit.]
Players exit.]
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.
That our devices still are overthrown;
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Player Queen exits.]
Queen exits.]
I think it be no other but e'en so.
OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?
OPHELIA  No more but so?
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
And in the porches of my ears did pour
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
whispers
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
Pours the poison in his ears.]
POLONIUS  I will say so.
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
It would be spoke to.
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Enter Hamlet.]
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]
LAERTES  O, treble woe
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
THE GHOST
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
conscience
damned
What is he whose grief
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
head.
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
We should profane the service of the dead
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
Methought it was very sweet
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
And do such bitter business as the day
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
When thou liest howling.
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
the men are as mad as he.
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
The devil take thy soul!
Yea, from the table of my memory
And what's untimely done. ...
good actor.
thyself,
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
You do remember all the circumstance?
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
ere you had done.
matter there.
nothing more.
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
fashion i' th' earth?
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
night's speech.
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
in trial.
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
this gentleman?
certain.
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
Against the which a moiety competent
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
And gave you such a masterly report
To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
Where should we have our thanks?
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
quaintly
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
her.
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
And dupped the chamber door,
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
You come most carefully upon your hour.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
greenly
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
friends.
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
You, as your business and desire shall point you
So please you, something touching the Lord
Sailors
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
my complexion.
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
You go not till I set you up a glass
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
KING  He made confession of you
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
With this regard their currents turn awry
Whose do you think it was?
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
HAMLET  Who, I?
PLAYER KING
HORATIO
LUCIANUS
HAMLET
HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
A second time I kill my husband dead
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
That it might please you to give quiet pass
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
And I beseech you instantly to visit
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
About the world have times twelve thirties been
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
Looking before and after, gave us not
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
It beckons you to go away with it
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
That thou so many princes at a shot
HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
How should I your true love know
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
And could of men distinguish, her election
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
And, after, we will both our judgments join
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
true. Let me question more in particular. What
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
HAMLET  Such an act
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
But in our circumstance and course of thought
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
As it is common for the younger sort
As by lot, God wot
And with a look so piteous in purport
HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
Which is not tomb enough and continent
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
By laborsome petition, and at last
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
strew
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Characters in the Play
HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
From our achievements, though performed at
HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
unfellowed.
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And makes each petty arture in this body
HAMLET  That's wormwood!
OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
HORATIO  Well, my lord.
HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
Get you a place.
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
HAMLET  As woman's love.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
were to know himself.
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
In censure of his seeming.
HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
HAMLET  Nothing.
HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
And how, and who, what means, and where they
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
But what we do determine oft we break.
HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Been struck so to the soul that presently
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
some frame and start not so wildly from my
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
HAMLET  I embrace it freely
GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
And never come mischance between us twain.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!
HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
The violence of either grief or joy
so.
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
To make it truster of your own report
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?
year.
When in your motion you are hot and dry
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
ALL  Our duty to your Honor.
A station like the herald Mercury
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
He likewise gives a frock or livery
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
And these few precepts in thy memory
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
stoup of liquor.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
This bodiless creation ecstasy
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Fortinbras.
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
HAMLET  Hold off your hands.
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
As low as to the fiends!
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
Welcome, my good friends.
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.
KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
It lifted up its head and did address
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
HAMLET, [to Laertes]
OPHELIA [sings]
HAMLET  This?
HAMLET  But where was this?
KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
Larded all with sweet flowers;
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Have you any further trade with us?
Marcellus?
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
KING  How long hath she been thus?
KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.
HAMLET  Words, words, words.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
OPHELIA [sings]
QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
O, my dear lord--
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
OSRIC  Of Laertes?
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
To tell us this.
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
He answers:
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Of general assault.
OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
Is not to stir without great argument,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
He gives a paper.]
He reads the letter.]
That she should lock herself from his resort,
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
OSRIC  Nothing neither way.
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
Horatio exits.]
King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
Of man and country--
OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
Enter Prologue.]
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]
That ever I was born to set it right!
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
Horatio exits.]
Osric to put on his hat.]
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--
HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
He exits.]
QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
LAERTES, [to Claudius]
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
How in my words somever she be shent,
Not when I saw 't.
KING  We will try it.
LAERTES  O, fear me not.
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
KING  Not that I know.
I will take my leave of you.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
My lord, I'll hit him now.
That he is open to incontinency;
LAERTES  Have at you now!
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
Here in the lobby.
Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
KING  How do you, pretty lady?
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
Most constantly.
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
It came to pass, as most like it was--
Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
Scene 1
As one incapable of her own distress
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Scene 3
What warlike noise is this?
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
And hath abatements and delays as many
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
After the thing it loves.
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
eyes.
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
And passion in the gods.
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
And more above, hath his solicitings,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
they ask you what it means, say you this:
the author of affection, but called it an honest
More than in words?
KING  Let's further think of this,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
legs.
LAERTES  Why ask you this?
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
And I the matter will reword, which madness
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
spheres,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]
that I have bad dreams.
Enter Horatio.]
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
them.--
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.
Enter the Player King and Queen.]
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
recorders!
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
about of brains.
fellowship in a cry of players?
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--
With true-love showers.
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
music. Look you, these are the stops.
Enter Gravedigger and Another.]
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
what it means.
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
might,"
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
lost,
northerly.
twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]
middle of her favors?
it?
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
hours.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
liest.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
all "impawned," as you call it?
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Without debatement further, more or less,
letters for you.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
love is too unmannerly.
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
is--
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]
even, sir.--
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
or a carpenter?"
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
easiness.
shall be the end of my business.
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
thoughts.
three-and-twenty years.
QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And drive his purpose into these delights.
For such a guest is meet.
that's for thoughts.
hits.
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
KING, [advancing with Polonius]
bounteous.
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
I must to England, you know that.
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
thousand tenants.
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
I ha 't!
that)
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
ALL  My lord, from head to foot.
KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
mother's admiration? Impart.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
HAMLET  What did you enact?
For and a shrouding sheet,
Why, how now, Hamlet?
and more strange return. Hamlet.
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
height,
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
KING  It falls right.
thought,
of very liberal conceit.
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
are spent.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
through the arras.]
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
might it not?
might it not?
A face without a heart?
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
torches.]
Claudius rises.]
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
grown honest.
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
And call it accident.
This grave shall have a living monument.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
heart,
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
And I am sick at heart.
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
Now out of this--
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
All may be well.	[He kneels.]
He digs up more skulls.]
Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
their trial, the bubbles are out.
The Queen falls.]
And so have I a noble father lost,
She scatters flowers.]
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]
th' worst.
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
you.	[She exits.]
with some Attendants.]
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
Enter Lucianus.]
Enter Hamlet.]
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]
offense in 't?
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?
GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
LAERTES  I will do 't,
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
hobby-horse is forgot."
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
ache to think on 't.
GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
LAERTES  A Norman was 't?
relish of it. I loved you not.
desert.
and Lords exit.]
They exit.]
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
Haply the seas, and countries different,
could you not?
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but the King exit.]
you?
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
With all my love I do commend me to you,
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
us
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
out
with you.
you.
you,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
KING  What do you call the play?
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
played once i' th' university, you say?
say,
KING  O Gertrude, come away!
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Here stooping to your clemency,
Yes, faith, heartily.
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.
safely,
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
friend, look to 't.
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
now.
Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
And either ... the devil or throw him out
All my smooth body.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Directly seasons him his enemy.
you say--
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
the stairs into the lobby.
With which she followed my poor father's body,
truepenny?
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
than with honesty?
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
And I a maid at your window,
and then, you know,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
calf there.--Be the players ready?
and presently.
For us and for our tragedy,
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
hadst thou!
play.
if philosophy could find it out.
Thou knowest already.
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
halt for 't. What players are they?
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
proverb is something musty.
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
play.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]
HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
Treachery! Seek it out.
HAMLET  If she should break it now!
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
from me to you.
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
drowned herself wittingly.
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
And my imaginations are as foul
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
come by and by.
For husband shalt thou--
O'er this solidity and compound mass
OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
LAERTES  None but his enemies.
Lest with this piteous action you convert
Laertes,
Of mine own eyes.
OPHELIA [sings]
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.
As to peace-parted souls.
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
OPHELIA [sings]
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
And let us once again assail your ears,
It warms the very sickness in my heart
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
KING  Alas, alas!
KING  Good Laertes,
QUEEN  Ay me, what act
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
Of mighty opposites.
KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.
POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
KING  What dost thou mean by this?
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?
Look here upon this picture and on this,
POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
HORATIO  No, by no means.
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
KING  O, for two special reasons,
HORATIO  That is most
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
Enter Laertes with others.
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
That was and is the question of these wars.
Danish soldiers:
HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
POLONIUS  Come, sirs.
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
HAMLET  What?
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
But keep a farm and carters.
GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
To both your honors.
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
A villain kills my father, and for that,
LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?
As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
Is thought-sick at the act.
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
That we find out the cause of this effect,
By letters congruing to that effect,
As will not leave their tinct.
O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.
HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
To lay our service freely at your feet,
For such a guest is meet.
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!
POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.
Hamlet.
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Hamlet,
Hamlet.
No more, sweet Hamlet!
FRANCISCO  Give you good night.
Hamlet.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
KING  Ay, Hamlet.
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
But you'll be secret?
BARNARDO  Well, good night.
HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?
HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
Speak to her, Hamlet.
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
HAMLET  So be it.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
HORATIO  Never believe it.
To let you know of it.
HAMLET  Do not believe it.
But do not go with it.
And will not wrong it.
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
The Other Man exits
Tis now the very witching time of night,
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Hold you the watch tonight?
And vanished from our sight.
O, throw away the worser part of it,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Doctor of Divinity
Good my lord, tell it.
Did you not speak to it?
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
From me, whose love was of that dignity
GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Courtiers at the Danish court:
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
But truly I do fear it.
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Heaven will direct it.
We would not understand what was most fit,
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
HAMLET  Whose was it?
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
HAMLET  Judgment!
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
To give it due content.
Between the pass and fell incensed points
If you desire to know the certainty
HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
In what particular thought to work I know not,
HAMLET  Nay, I know not.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
And there I see such black and grained spots
GHOST  I find thee apt;
The head is not more native to the heart,
This something-settled matter in his heart,
HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
QUEEN  More matter with less art.
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
Thy natural magic and dire property
HORATIO  I beseech you.
QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
HAMLET  I do beseech you.
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
I'll visit you.
KING  Who shall stay you?
QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
This unprevailing woe and think of us
I'll rant as well as thou.
HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
But let me hear from you.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
HAMLET  What hour now?
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
And he to England shall along with you.
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.
What I have said to you.
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
This marvel to you.
HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
But I have that within which passes show,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
HAMLET  I pray you.
Armed, say you?
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
Will not debate the question of this straw.
HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.
Of these dilated articles allow.
Therefore, let's follow.
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
His beard was as white as snow,
Does by their own insinuation grow.
OTHER  But is this law?
And tell you what I know.
HAMLET  What's the matter now?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
Make you to ravel all this matter out
HAMLET  My fate cries out
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
From the first corse till he that died today,
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
O, say!
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
Thus runs the world away.
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
The hart ungalled play.
POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
I will go pray.
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
KING  Give me some light. Away!
BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.
One word more, good lady.
HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
For if the King like not the comedy,
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
This warlike volley.
Dost know this waterfly?
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
She lifts the cup.]
As England was his faithful tributary,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Most free in his reply.
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
Enter a Messenger.]
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
Enter Osric, a courtier.]
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
Handing him a paper.]
HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.
To tell my story.
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]
OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--
POLONIUS  Upon my honor--
That are so fortified against our story,
He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Polonius hides behind the arras.]
Is not this something more than fantasy?
HAMLET  Ecstasy?
Guildenstern, and Lords.]
Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
Answer, and think upon this business.
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
And even the like precurse of feared events,
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Bring him before us.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And we did think it writ down in our duty
Than to entreaty.
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
And put it in his pocket--
KING  Where is Polonius?
Passing through nature to eternity.
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]
Enter King and Laertes.]
That I essentially am not in madness,
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
It spreads his arms.]
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
They withdraw.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
It could not move thus.
How now? What news?
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.
Prepare to play.]
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
By indirections find directions out.
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Come, for England.	[He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius.]
Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Enter Rosencrantz.]
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Pointing to Polonius.]
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
Out of his brows.
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.
A flourish for the Players.]
knows,
CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]
We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
Of blue Olympus.
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
To youth and liberty.
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Over the nasty sty!
In that and all things will we show our duty.
HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.
For they are actions that a man might play;
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
I have sworn 't.
KING  I do not think 't.
What think you on 't?
Give me one poor request.
GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
HAMLET  Why,
HAMLET  Why?
HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?
HAMLET  Why,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]
GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--
HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
Giving them a paper.]
HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]
He writes.]
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]
Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]
He falls.]
Ghost beckons.]
Enter the Players with recorders.]
Enter the Players.]
Ghost exits.]
Enter Queen and Polonius.]
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]
Enter Horatio and others.]
Enter a Messenger with letters.]
Enter Sailors.]
HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]
He exits.]
Francisco exits.]
LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]
Hamlet exits.]
Hamlet exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]
Cornelius.]
He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Guildenstern and Attendants.]
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]
They enter with Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Hamlet.]
HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.
FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]
To his unmastered importunity.
HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
Ghost and Hamlet exit.]
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
For your desire to know what is between us,
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
Thus didst thou."
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
HAMLET  How "strangely"?
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]
GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]
HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?
HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--

Characters in the Play
======================
THE GHOST
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
OPHELIA
LAERTES, her brother
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
Courtiers at the Danish court:
  VOLTEMAND
  CORNELIUS
  ROSENCRANTZ
  GUILDENSTERN
  OSRIC
  Gentlemen
  A Lord
Danish soldiers:
  FRANCISCO
  BARNARDO
  MARCELLUS
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Two Messengers
Sailors
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
Doctor of Divinity
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]


BARNARDO  Who's there?

FRANCISCO
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

FRANCISCO  Barnardo?

BARNARDO  He.

FRANCISCO
You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO
'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO  Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


FRANCISCO
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

MARCELLUS
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?

FRANCISCO
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
[Francisco exits.]

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO  A piece of him.

BARNARDO
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

HORATIO
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

HORATIO
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO  Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--

[Enter Ghost.]


MARCELLUS
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

BARNARDO
In the same figure like the King that's dead.

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

HORATIO
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.

MARCELLUS
It is offended.

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

HORATIO
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

BARNARDO
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on 't?

HORATIO
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.

MARCELLUS
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

MARCELLUS
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is 't that can inform me?

HORATIO  That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO
I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

[Enter Ghost.]

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
[It spreads his arms.]
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

MARCELLUS
Shall I strike it with my partisan?

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Tis here.
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO
It was about to speak when the cock crew.

HORATIO
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.

MARCELLUS
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

HORATIO
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.]


KING
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
[Giving them a paper.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
In that and all things will we show our duty.

KING
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES  My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

KING
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

KING
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

HAMLET, [aside]
A little more than kin and less than kind.

KING
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

QUEEN
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET
Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN  If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET
"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

HAMLET
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]


HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!

HORATIO
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

HAMLET
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Marcellus?

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

HAMLET
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
even, sir.--
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO
A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

HAMLET
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

HORATIO
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

HAMLET
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father--methinks I see my father.

HORATIO
Where, my lord?

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HORATIO
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

HAMLET
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HORATIO
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET  Saw who?

HORATIO
My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET  The King my father?

HORATIO
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HORATIO
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.

HAMLET  But where was this?

MARCELLUS
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET
Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO  My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

HORATIO
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

ALL  We do, my lord.

HAMLET
Armed, say you?

ALL  Armed, my lord.

HAMLET  From top to toe?

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

HORATIO
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET  Pale or red?

HORATIO
Nay, very pale.

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

HORATIO
Most constantly.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

HORATIO
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

HORATIO
Not when I saw 't.

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
Perchance 'twill walk again.

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

HAMLET
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

HAMLET
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
eyes.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]


LAERTES
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

LAERTES
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

LAERTES  Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

OPHELIA
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

[Enter Polonius.]

I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

POLONIUS
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

LAERTES
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

LAERTES
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

POLONIUS
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

POLONIUS
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

OPHELIA
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion--

POLONIUS
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

OPHELIA
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]


HAMLET
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO
It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET  What hour now?

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

HORATIO
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

[Enter Ghost.]


HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

HAMLET
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
[Ghost beckons.]

HORATIO
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HAMLET
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

HORATIO
Do not, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

HORATIO
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

MARCELLUS
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

HORATIO
Be ruled. You shall not go.

HAMLET  My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

HORATIO
He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO
Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO
Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
further.

GHOST
Mark me.

HAMLET  I will.

GHOST  My hour is almost come
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

GHOST
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET  What?

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

HAMLET  O God!

GHOST
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET  Murder?

GHOST
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST  I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

GHOST
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

HAMLET
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables--meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
[He writes.]
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
I have sworn 't.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HAMLET  So be it.

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

MARCELLUS
How is 't, my noble lord?

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

HORATIO
Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

HORATIO
Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you'll be secret?

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.

HORATIO
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.

HORATIO
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HAMLET
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

HAMLET
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET
Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

HAMLET
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

HAMLET
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
would,"
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
might,"
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]


POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS
"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
or so," and "gentleman."

POLONIUS
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS  What said he?

OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.]


KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!

QUEEN  Ay, amen!
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.

KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
[Polonius exits.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.

QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main--
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

KING
Well, we shall sift him.

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.]

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[He gives a paper.]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
most beautified Ophelia--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
[He reads the letter.]
	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
	Doubt truth to be a liar,
	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING  But how hath she received his love?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.

POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?

KING  Not that I know.

POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.

KING  How may we try it further?

POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

POLONIUS
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING  We will try it.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]


QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.

POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
daughter?

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to 't.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET  Between who?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET  Into my grave?

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
I will take my leave of you.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]


POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
[Polonius exits.]

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?

ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
grown honest.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
th' worst.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
'Tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
you love me, hold not off.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
delights not me"?

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for 't. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
and his load too.

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
[A flourish for the Players.]

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, 'twas then indeed.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome--

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	One fair daughter, and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
	It came to pass, as most like it was--
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

[Enter the Players.]

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line--let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!

POLONIUS  This is too long.

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

FIRST PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.]


KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.]

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
[Queen exits.]

POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
[They withdraw.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.

OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.

HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

OPHELIA  My lord?

HAMLET  Are you fair?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

KING, [advancing with Polonius]
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]


HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
[Players exit.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

[Enter Horatio.]


HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

HORATIO
O, my dear lord--

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
[Sound a flourish.]

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
torches.]


KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
played once i' th' university, you say?

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.

HAMLET  What did you enact?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
Capitol. Brutus killed me.

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.--Be the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
legs.

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

HAMLET  Nothing.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET  Who, I?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
hours.

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot."
[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
[Players exit.]

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

[Enter Prologue.]


HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
what it means.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
play.

PROLOGUE
	For us and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET  As woman's love.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]


PLAYER KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

PLAYER QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

PLAYER KING
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
[Player Queen exits.]

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in 't?

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i' th' world.

KING  What do you call the play?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

[Enter Lucianus.]

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
[Pours the poison in his ears.]

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
[Claudius rises.]

OPHELIA  The King rises.

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

HAMLET
	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
	   The hart ungalled play.
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	   This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
	   A very very--pajock.

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
	For if the King like not the comedy,
	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]


GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say--

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother's admiration? Impart.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
proverb is something musty.

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET  I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

[Enter Polonius.]

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
shape of a camel?

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
come by and by.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
'Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]


KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
[Polonius exits.]
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
[He sheathes his sword.]
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Queen and Polonius.]


POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

QUEEN
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

QUEEN
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
O, I am slain!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN
As kill a king?

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--

QUEEN  No more!

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

[Enter Ghost.]

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
figure?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
[Ghost exits.]

QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[Pointing to Polonius.]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN  What shall I do?

HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.

QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.]


KING
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?

QUEEN
Bestow this place on us a little while.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.

KING  O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

KING  O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what's untimely done. ...
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Safely stowed.

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


ROSENCRANTZ
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing--

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King and two or three.]


KING
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

How now, what hath befallen?

ROSENCRANTZ
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.

KING  But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING
Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

[They enter with Hamlet.]


KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

HAMLET  At supper.

KING  At supper where?

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
That's the end.

KING  Alas, alas!

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.

KING  Where is Polonius?

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

KING
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET  For England?

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET  Good.

KING
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	[He exits.]

KING
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
[All but the King exit.]
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]


FORTINBRAS
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN
Yes, it is already garrisoned.

HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

HAMLET
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]


QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

QUEEN  What would she have?

GENTLEMAN
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

HORATIO
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]


OPHELIA
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA [sings]
	How should I your true love know
	   From another one?
	By his cockle hat and staff
	   And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
	   He is dead and gone;
	At his head a grass-green turf,
	   At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

[Enter King.]


QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

OPHELIA [sings]
	   Larded all with sweet flowers;
	Which bewept to the ground did not go
	   With true-love showers.

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.

KING  Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
	   All in the morning betime,
	And I a maid at your window,
	   To be your Valentine.
	Then up he rose and donned his clothes
	   And dupped the chamber door,
	Let in the maid, that out a maid
	   Never departed more.

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

OPHELIA
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
	   Alack and fie for shame,
	Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
	   By Cock, they are to blame.
	Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
	   You promised me to wed."
He answers:
	"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
	   An thou hadst not come to my bed."

KING  How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

KING
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
[Horatio exits.]
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father's death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
[A noise within.]

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

KING  Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

[Enter a Messenger.]

What is the matter?

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
[A noise within.]

QUEEN
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

KING  The doors are broke.

[Enter Laertes with others.
]

LAERTES
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

ALL  No, let's come in!

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

ALL  We will, we will.

LAERTES
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Gertrude.--
Speak, man.

LAERTES  Where is my father?

KING  Dead.

QUEEN
But not by him.

KING  Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.

KING  Who shall stay you?

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.

KING  Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

KING  Will you know them, then?

LAERTES
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.

KING  Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye.

  [A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

[Enter Ophelia.]

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.

OPHELIA [sings]
	They bore him barefaced on the bier,
	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
	And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.

LAERTES
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
daughter.

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that's for thoughts.

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.

OPHELIA [sings]
	And will he not come again?
	And will he not come again?
	   No, no, he is dead.
	   Go to thy deathbed.
	He never will come again.

	His beard was as white as snow,
	All flaxen was his poll.
	   He is gone, he is gone,
	   And we cast away moan.
	God 'a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
you.	[She exits.]

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

KING
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.

LAERTES  Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call 't in question.

KING  So you shall,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Horatio and others.]


HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

[Enter Sailors.]


SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter King and Laertes.]


KING
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.

KING  O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.

LAERTES
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

KING
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

How now? What news?

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

MESSENGER
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.

KING  Laertes, you shall hear
them.--
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
Can you advise me?

LAERTES
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
"Thus didst thou."

KING  If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

KING
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING  It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

KING
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

KING  A Norman.

LAERTES
Upon my life, Lamord.

KING  The very same.

LAERTES
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.

KING  He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Now out of this--

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

KING
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

KING
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this "would"
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father's son
More than in words?

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

KING
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.

LAERTES  I will do 't,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

KING  Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
I ha 't!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
noise?

[Enter Queen.]


QUEEN
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

QUEEN
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

LAERTES
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let's follow.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.

OTHER  But is this law?

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

OTHER  Why, he had none.

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself--

OTHER  Go to!

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?"

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
[The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
	In youth when I did love, did love,
	   Methought it was very sweet
	To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
	   O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	But age with his stealing steps
	Hath clawed me in his clutch,
	And hath shipped me into the land,
	As if I had never been such.
[He digs up a skull.]

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on 't.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	A pickax and a spade, a spade,
	For and a shrouding sheet,
	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.
[He digs up more skulls.]

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
Whose grave's this, sirrah?

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
mine.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
from me to you.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

HAMLET  What woman then?

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she's dead.

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
grave-maker?

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.

HAMLET  How long is that since?

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
matter there.

HAMLET  Why?

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.

HAMLET  How came he mad?

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET  Whose was it?

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
Whose do you think it was?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
King's jester.

HAMLET  This?

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
fashion i' th' earth?

HORATIO  E'en so.

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

DOCTOR
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.

LAERTES
Must there no more be done?

DOCTOR  No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
[She scatters flowers.]
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.

LAERTES  O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
[Leaps in the grave.]
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET, [advancing]
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

KING  Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

ALL  Gentlemen!

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
thyself,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
[Horatio exits.]
[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
night's speech.
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]


HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--

HORATIO  That is most
certain.

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HAMLET
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
[Handing him a paper.]
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.

HORATIO
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HORATIO
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

HAMLET
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]


OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
head.

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.]

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?

OSRIC  Sir?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
are spent.

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is--

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
unfellowed.

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all "impawned," as you call it?

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
turn.

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

[Enter a Lord.]


LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET  In happy time.

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
about my heart. But it is no matter.

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]


KING
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

HAMLET, [to Laertes]
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

HAMLET
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

KING
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

KING
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

LAERTES
This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
[Prepare to play.]

KING
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
[Trumpets the while.]

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

HAMLET  One.

LAERTES  No.

HAMLET  Judgment!

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES  Well, again.

KING
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here's to thy health.
[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Give him the cup.

HAMLET
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

LAERTES
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

KING
Our son shall win.

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
[She lifts the cup.]

HAMLET  Good madam.

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

KING, [aside]
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES, [to Claudius]
My lord, I'll hit him now.

KING  I do not think 't.

LAERTES, [aside]
And yet it is almost against my conscience.

HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

LAERTES  Have at you now!
[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

HAMLET  Nay, come again.
[The Queen falls.]

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

LAERTES
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
[He falls.]
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

HAMLET
How does the Queen?

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Treachery! Seek it out.

LAERTES
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.	[Hurts the King.]

ALL  Treason, treason!

KING
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
[Forcing him to drink the poison.]
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

LAERTES  He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO  Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
[A march afar off and shot within.]
What warlike noise is this?

[Enter Osric.]


OSRIC
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

HORATIO
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
[March within.]
Why does the drum come hither?

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]


FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

FORTINBRAS
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO  Not from his
mouth,
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HORATIO
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.]