A Captain in Fortinbras's army
ACT 2
ACT 3
ACT 4
ACT 5
ALL  Armed, my lord.
ALL  Gentlemen!
ALL  My lord, from head to foot.
ALL  No, let's come in!
ALL  Our duty to your Honor.
ALL  Treason, treason!
ALL  We do, my lord.
ALL  We will, we will.
AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
As by lot, God wot
A Lord
ACT 1
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
According to the phrase or the addition
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
A flourish for the Players.]
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
About the world have times twelve thirties been
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Affront Ophelia.
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
After the thing it loves.
Against the which a moiety competent
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Alack and fie for shame,
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but the King exit.]
All flaxen was his poll.
All from her father's death, and now behold!
All given to mine ear.
All in the morning betime,
All may be well.	[He kneels.]
All my smooth body.
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
All but Hamlet exit.]
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Among a mineral of metals base,
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
And I a maid at your window,
And I am sick at heart.
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
And, after, we will both our judgments join
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
And a most instant tetter barked about,
And call the noblest to the audience.
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
And I the matter will reword, which madness
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
And all we mourn for.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
And bear it to the chapel.
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
And break your own neck down.
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
And call it accident.
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
And can you by no drift of conference
And carriage of the article designed,
And, as the world were now but to begin,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
And could of men distinguish, her election
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
And do such bitter business as the day
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
And each particular hair to stand an end,
And either ... the devil or throw him out
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
And even the like precurse of feared events,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
And dupped the chamber door,
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
And foreign mart for implements of war,
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
And for the day confined to fast in fires
And for your rapier most especial,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
And gave you such a masterly report
And gem of all the nation.
And hath abatements and delays as many
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
And hath shipped me into the land,
And he to England shall along with you.
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
And hears it roar beneath.
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
And his sandal shoon.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
And hurt my brother.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
And in his grave rained many a tear.
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
And in the porches of my ears did pour
And in this brainish apprehension kills
And it must follow, as the night the day,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
And let him know so.
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
And let them know both what we mean to do
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
And let us once again assail your ears,
And live the purer with the other half!
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
And makes each petty arture in this body
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
And, as I think, they have already order
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
And drive his purpose into these delights.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
And more above, hath his solicitings,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
And never come mischance between us twain.
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
And not have strewed thy grave.
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
And passion in the gods.
And pious action we do sugar o'er
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
And prey on garbage.
And prologue to the omen coming on,
And put it in his pocket--
And reason panders will.
And recks not his own rede.
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
And set a double varnish on the fame
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
And so have I a noble father lost,
And so he goes to heaven,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
And sure I am two men there is not living
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
And tell you what I know.
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
And that I see, in passages of proof,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
And that his soul may be as damned and black
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
And that our drift look through our bad
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
And then it started like a guilty thing
And there I see such black and grained spots
And there assume some other horrible form
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
And these few precepts in thy memory
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
And they in France of the best rank and station
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
And thus the native hue of resolution
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
A double blessing is a double grace.
And vanished from our sight.
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
And we cast away moan.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
And what's untimely done. ...
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
And will not let belief take hold of him
And will not wrong it.
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
And how, and who, what means, and where they
And to the last bended their light on me.
And to the manner born, it is a custom
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
And with a larger tether may he walk
And with a look so piteous in purport
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And with no less nobility of love
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
And our affairs from England come too late.
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
And, like a man to double business bound,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
And my imaginations are as foul
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Answer, and think upon this business.
Appears before them and with solemn march
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
Are joyfully returned.
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
A face without a heart?
A march afar off and shot within.]
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Armed, say you?
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
As England was his faithful tributary,
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
A sable silvered.
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
As are companions noted and most known
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
As day does to your eye.
Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
A second time I kill my husband dead
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
A very very--pajock.
An understanding simple and unschooled.
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As fits a king's remembrance.
As from the body of contraction plucks
As harbingers preceding still the fates
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
As he in his particular act and place
As he is very potent with such spirits,
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
As if I had never been such.
As if he had been loosed out of hell
As if increase of appetite had grown
As if it some impartment did desire
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
As infinite as man may undergo,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
As it doth well appear unto our state)
As it hath used to do, that I have found
As it is common for the younger sort
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As kill a king?
As level as the cannon to his blank
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As low as to the fiends!
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
As make your bouts more violent to that end)
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
As of a man faithful and honorable.
As oft as any passions under heaven
A combination and a form indeed
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
As one incapable of her own distress
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
At his head a grass-green turf,
At his heels a stone.
A noise within.]
A noise within:] "Let her come in!"
A royal knavery--an exact command,
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
A station like the herald Mercury
A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
An thou hadst not come to my bed."
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
As therein are set down.
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
As the indifferent children of the earth.
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
As to expend your time with us awhile
As to peace-parted souls.
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
As will not leave their tinct.
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
Away, for everything is sealed and done
A noise within.]
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
A villain kills my father, and for that,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
As of a father; for let the world take note,
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Ay, madam, it is common.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
A little more than kin and less than kind.
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
A truant disposition, good my lord.
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
BARNARDO
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.
BARNARDO  'Tis here.
BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?
BARNARDO  He.
BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
BARNARDO  Last night of all,
BARNARDO  Long live the King!
BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?
BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
BARNARDO  Well, good night.
BARNARDO  Who's there?
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
Be all my sins remembered.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Been struck so to the soul that presently
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
Before my God, I might not this believe
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
Be ruled. You shall not go.
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
Bring him before us.
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
But I do prophesy th' election lights
But I have that within which passes show,
But I will delve one yard below their mines
But age with his stealing steps
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
But do not go with it.
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
But, better looked into, he truly found
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
But he's an arrant knave.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
But as we often see against some storm
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
But in our circumstance and course of thought
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
But it reserved some quantity of choice
But keep a farm and carters.
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
But let me hear from you.
But let that go.
But let this same be presently performed
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
But never doubt I love.
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
But not by him.
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
But not where I have aimed them.
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
But that I know love is begun by time
But that the dread of something after death,
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
But this eternal blazon must not be
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
But to confront the visage of offense?
But to recover of us, by strong hand
But truly I do fear it.
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
But what we do determine oft we break.
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
But with much forcing of his disposition.
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
But, orderly to end where I begun:
But you'll be secret?
But you must know your father lost a father,
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
But, to my mind, though I am native here
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
By Cock, they are to blame.
By desperate appliance are relieved
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
By his cockle hat and staff
By indirections find directions out.
By laborsome petition, and at last
By letters congruing to that effect,
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
By this encompassment and drift of question
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.
CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]
CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.
CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
CORNELIUS
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
Can you advise me?
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
Characters in the Play
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
Christian burial.
Christian burial.
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Claudius rises.]
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Come, for England.	[He exits.]
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
Come hither, gentlemen,
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Come.
Come short of what he did.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Come, some music!
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Consent to swear.
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Cornelius.]
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Could not with all their quantity of love
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
Courtiers at the Danish court:
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
DOCTOR
DOCTOR  No more be done.
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Danish soldiers:
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
Denmark?
Denmark.
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Did nothing.
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Did you not speak to it?
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
Directly seasons him his enemy.
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
Does by their own insinuation grow.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
Dost know this waterfly?
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Doubt that the sun doth move,
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
Doubt truth to be a liar,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Do not, my lord.
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
Doctor of Divinity
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]
Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Elsinore?
England.
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Gravedigger and Another.]
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Horatio.]
Enter Horatio and others.]
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]
Enter King and Laertes.]
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Enter King and two or three.]
Enter King.]
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]
Enter Laertes with others.
Enter Lucianus.]
Enter Ophelia.]
Enter Ophelia distracted.]
Enter Ophelia.]
Enter Osric, a courtier.]
Enter Osric.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Prologue.]
Enter Queen and Polonius.]
Enter Queen.]
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Enter Rosencrantz.]
Enter Sailors.]
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
Enter a Lord.]
Enter a Messenger.]
Enter a Messenger with letters.]
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]
Enter the Players.]
Enter the Player King and Queen.]
Enter the Players with recorders.]
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?
FIRST PLAYER
FIRST PLAYER
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
FORTINBRAS
FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]
FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?
FORTINBRAS
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO  Barnardo?
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO  Give you good night.
FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Farewell, dear mother.
Fare you well, my dove.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]
For England.
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
For Hecuba!
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
For and a shrouding sheet,
For art and exercise in your defense,
For by the image of my cause I see
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
For every man hath business and desire,
For food and diet to some enterprise
For he himself is subject to his birth.
For he was likely, had he been put on,
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
For husband shalt thou--
For if the King like not the comedy,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
Forcing him to drink the poison.]
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Fortinbras.
For out o' doors he went without their helps
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
For such a guest is meet.
For such a guest is meet.
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
For they are actions that a man might play;
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
For the supply and profit of our hope,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
For us and for our tragedy,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
For what we know must be and is as common
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
For women fear too much, even as they love,
For your desire to know what is between us,
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Francisco exits.]
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
From another one?
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?
From me, whose love was of that dignity
From our achievements, though performed at
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
From the first corse till he that died today,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
GENTLEMAN
GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
GHOST
GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
GHOST  My hour is almost come
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST  I find thee apt;
GHOST
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.
GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.
GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.
GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.
GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.
GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.
GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.
GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?
GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.
GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.
GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--
GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.
GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
Gentlemen
Gertrude.--
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Get you a place.
Ghost and Hamlet exit.]
Ghost beckons.]
Ghost exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Give him the cup.
Give me my father!
Give me one poor request.
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
Gives me superfluous death.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
Give us the foils. Come on.
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Giving them a paper.]
Giving to you no further personal power
God bless you, sir.
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
Good my lord, tell it.
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Good night, mother.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Go to thy deathbed.
God 'a mercy on his soul.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
Guildenstern, and Lords.]
Guildenstern and Attendants.]
Guildenstern.]
HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.
HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
HAMLET, [aside]
HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
HAMLET  Are you fair?
HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?
HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.
HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
HAMLET  A whole one, I.
HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
HAMLET  As woman's love.
HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?
HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
HAMLET  Between who?
HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.
HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.
HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?
HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?
HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?
HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?
HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
HAMLET  I do beseech you.
HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.
HAMLET  I pray you.
HAMLET  Into my grave?
HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
HAMLET  Is 't possible?
HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.
HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.
HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?
HAMLET  Nothing.
HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
HAMLET  Or like a whale.
HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
HAMLET  If she should break it now!
HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?
HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.
HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?
HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?
HAMLET  But where was this?
HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.
HAMLET
HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!
HAMLET  Saw who?
HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.
HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.
HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.
HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
HAMLET  That's wormwood!
HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.
HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.
HAMLET  The King my father?
HAMLET
HAMLET  'Tis very strange.
HAMLET  From top to toe?
HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
HAMLET
HAMLET  I would I had been there.
HAMLET  Pale or red?
HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?
HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?
HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?
HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.
HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?
HAMLET  What did you enact?
HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!
HAMLET  I will.
HAMLET  Murder?
HAMLET  My fate cries out
HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
HAMLET  O God!
HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.
HAMLET  What hour now?
HAMLET
HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  What?
HAMLET  Who, I?
HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
HAMLET
HAMLET  Hold off your hands.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.
HAMLET  O, wonderful!
HAMLET  So be it.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Why,
HAMLET  Why,
HAMLET  Words, words, words.
HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!
HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
HAMLET
HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
HAMLET
HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
HAMLET  With drink, sir?
HAMLET  You are welcome.
HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
HAMLET
HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--
HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?
HAMLET  Ecstasy?
HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?
HAMLET  Nay, but to live
HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?
HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
HAMLET  Such an act
HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  What's the matter now?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
HAMLET, [advancing]
HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]
HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
HAMLET  At supper.
HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
HAMLET  Come on, sir.
HAMLET  Do not believe it.
HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
HAMLET  For England?
HAMLET  Good.
HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]
HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
HAMLET  How came he mad?
HAMLET  How if I answer no?
HAMLET  How long is that since?
HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
HAMLET  How "strangely"?
HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
HAMLET  In happy time.
HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
HAMLET  I embrace it freely
HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.
HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
HAMLET  Judgment!
HAMLET  Nay, I know not.
HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
HAMLET  Of him, sir.
HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
HAMLET  One.
HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
HAMLET  Safely stowed.
HAMLET
HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]
HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--
HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?
HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?
HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
HAMLET  This?
HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
HAMLET  Upon what ground?
HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?
HAMLET  What woman then?
HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Whose was it?
HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?
HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
HAMLET  Why?
HAMLET  Why he more than another?
HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?
HAMLET  What's his weapon?
HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
HAMLET, [to Laertes]
HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
HAMLET
HAMLET  No, by this hand.
HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Good madam.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  Nay, come again.
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
HORATIO  'Tis here.
HORATIO  A piece of him.
HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.
HORATIO  Friends to this ground.
HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.
HORATIO  Half a share.
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.
HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
HORATIO
HORATIO  That can I.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  My lord, I did,
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  I warrant it will.
HORATIO
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.
HORATIO  Heavens secure him!
HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.
HORATIO
HORATIO  Is it a custom?
HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.
HORATIO
HORATIO  My lord, my lord!
HORATIO  No, by no means.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  What news, my lord?
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.
HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.
HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.
HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.
HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO  I did very well note him.
HORATIO  Very well, my lord.
HORATIO  Well, my lord.
HORATIO  You might have rhymed.
HORATIO
HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.
HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.
HORATIO  Ay, my lord.
HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.
HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
HORATIO  E'en so.
HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.
HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
HORATIO  How was this sealed?
HORATIO  I beseech you.
HORATIO  It might, my lord.
HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
HORATIO  Is 't possible?
HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.
HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--
HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!
HORATIO  That is most
HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?
HORATIO  What's that, my lord?
HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
HORATIO
HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?
HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!
HORATIO
HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.
HORATIO
HORATIO  Never believe it.
HORATIO
HORATIO  Not from his
HORATIO  What is it you would see?
HORATIO
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Hamlet,
Hamlet.
Hamlet exits.]
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hamlet exits.]
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
Hamlet the Dane.
Handing him a paper.]
Haply the seas, and countries different,
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Have of your audience been most free and
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
Have you any further trade with us?
Have you forgot me?
Have you so slander any moment leisure
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Her brother is in secret come from France,
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
He closes with you in this consequence:
He digs up a skull.]
He digs up more skulls.]
Heaven will direct it.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Here in the lobby.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
Here stooping to your clemency,
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
Here's to thy health.
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
He falls to such perusal of my face
He falls.]
He gives a paper.]
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
He hath not failed to pester us with message
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
He likewise gives a frock or livery
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
He never gave commandment for their death.
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
Help, ho!
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
He reads the letter.]
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
He answers:
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
He exits.]
He is dead and gone;
He is gone, he is gone,
He never will come again.
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
He sheathes his sword.]
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
He that thou knowest thine,
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
Heavens make our presence and our practices
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
He waxes desperate with imagination.
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
He writes.]
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
His access to me.
His beard was as white as snow,
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
His liberty is full of threats to all--
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
His silence will sit drooping.
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Hold you the watch tonight?
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
Horatio exits.]
Horatio exits.]
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
Horatio--or I do forget myself!
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
How all occasions do inform against me
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
How does the Queen?
How does your Honor for this many a day?
How in my words somever she be shent,
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
How is 't, my noble lord?
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
How now? What news?
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
How now, what hath befallen?
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
How should I your true love know
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
How these things came about. So shall you hear
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
If I had played the desk or table-book
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.
I could not but by her. The other motive
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
Indeed would make one think there might be
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
I have in quick determination
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
I ha 't!
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
If by direct or by collateral hand
If damned custom have not brazed it so
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
I hear him coming.
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
In further evil?
In general synod take away her power,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
It is a poison tempered by himself.
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
In filial obligation for some term
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
In honorable fashion--
I did repel his letters and denied
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
I do receive your offered love like love
I have a voice and precedent of peace
In obstinate condolement is a course
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
It is most retrograde to our desire,
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
I doubt it is no other but the main--
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
I have sworn 't.
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
I'll rant as well as thou.
I'll visit you.
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
If circumstances lead me, I will find
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
I pray you now receive them.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
If his chief good and market of his time
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
I will take my leave of you.
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
I pray you, go with me.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
If you desire to know the certainty
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
In censure of his seeming.
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
In noise so rude against me?
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
Is by a forged process of my death
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
It beckons you to go away with it
It came to pass, as most like it was--
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
I shall not look upon his like again.
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
I do believe you think what now you speak,
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
I must be cruel only to be kind.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
I should have fatted all the region kites
In second husband let me be accurst.
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?
I think it be no other but e'en so.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
Into a tow'ring passion.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Into the madness wherein now he raves
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
I will bestow him and will answer well
I will go pray.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
I would not hear your enemy say so,
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
If there be any good thing to be done
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
If with too credent ear you list his songs
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Importing the surrender of those lands
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
In that and all things will we show our duty.
In the corrupted currents of this world,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
In the same figure like the King that's dead.
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
In what particular thought to work I know not,
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
In youth when I did love, did love,
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Is not this something more than fantasy?
Is not to stir without great argument,
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
Is thought-sick at the act.
Is very cunning in.
It could not move thus.
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
It had been so with us, had we been there.
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
It is offended.
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
It lifted up its head and did address
It may be death.
It must be shortly known to him from England
I bought an unction of a mountebank
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
It sends some precious instance of itself
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
It spreads his arms.]
I must to England, you know that.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
It was as I have seen it in his life,
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.
It waves you to a more removed ground.
It will be laid to us, whose providence
It will be short. The interim's mine,
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
It would be spoke to.
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING  But how hath she received his love?
KING  It likes us well,
KING
KING  How may we try it further?
KING  Not that I know.
KING  We will try it.
KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?
KING
KING
KING, [advancing with Polonius]
KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
KING  Give me some light. Away!
KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?
KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
KING  It shall be so.
KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
KING  What do you call the play?
KING
KING
KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
KING, [rising]
KING
KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
KING  Attend!
KING  Ay, Hamlet.
KING  Dead.
KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?
KING  Good Laertes,
KING  How long hath she been thus?
KING  O Gertrude, come away!
KING  O heavy deed!
KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
KING
KING  Alas, alas!
KING  But where is he?
KING
KING  At supper where?
KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
KING  What dost thou mean by this?
KING  Where is Polonius?
KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.
KING
KING
KING  Conceit upon her father.
KING  How do you, pretty lady?
KING  Pretty Ophelia--
KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.
KING
KING
KING  If it be so, Laertes
KING  Laertes, you shall hear
KING  Let him demand his fill.
KING  So you shall,
KING  The doors are broke.
KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
KING  Who shall stay you?
KING  Why, now you speak
KING  Will you know them, then?
KING
KING
KING  O, for two special reasons,
KING
KING
KING  It falls right.
KING
KING  A Norman.
KING  He made confession of you
KING  The very same.
KING
KING
KING
KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
KING  Let's further think of this,
KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!
KING  Pluck them asunder.
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING  I do not think 't.
KING  Part them. They are incensed.
KING, [aside]
KING  Gertrude, do not drink.
KING  She swoons to see them bleed.
KING
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
King's jester.
LAERTES  My dread lord,
LAERTES, her brother
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  O, fear me not.
LAERTES  Think it no more.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]
LAERTES
LAERTES, [aside]
LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.
LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
LAERTES  A Norman was 't?
LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]
LAERTES  Come, one for me.
LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?
LAERTES  Have at you now!
LAERTES  He is justly served.
LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  I will do 't,
LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
LAERTES  Know you the hand?
LAERTES  Let this be so.
LAERTES  No.
LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]
LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.
LAERTES  Well, again.
LAERTES  Where is my father?
LAERTES
LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?
LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
LAERTES  None but his enemies.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?
LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?
LAERTES  Why ask you this?
LAERTES
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
LAERTES
LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
LAERTES  O, treble woe
LAERTES  You mock me, sir.
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES, [to Claudius]
LAERTES
LAERTES
LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.
LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
LUCIANUS
Laertes,
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Larded all with sweet flowers;
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Leaps in the grave.]
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Let me be no assistant for a state,
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
Look here upon this picture and on this,
Looking before and after, gave us not
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.
MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?
MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.
MARCELLUS  My good lord.
MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.
MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.
MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.
MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
MESSENGER
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
Mad for thy love?
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
Make you to ravel all this matter out
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
Makes vow before his uncle never more
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Marcellus?
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
March within.]
Mark me.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
May give his saying deed, which is no further
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
May sweep to my revenge.
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Methought it was very sweet
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
More honored in the breach than the observance.
More relative than this. The play's the thing
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
More than in words?
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
Most constantly.
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Most free in his reply.
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Most holy and religious fear it is
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
Most throughly for my father.
Most welcome home!
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
Must give us pause. There's the respect
Must render up myself.
Must there no more be done?
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
My custom always of the afternoon,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
My father, in his habit as he lived!
My father--methinks I see my father.
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
My head should be struck off.
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
My lord, I have.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
My lord, I'll hit him now.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
My lord, the King your father.
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
My tables--meet it is I set it down
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Nay, come, let's go together.
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
Nay, very pale.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
Never departed more.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
Now I am alone.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
Now falls on Priam.
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
No, my good lord, but as you did command
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
None wed the second but who killed the first.
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
Not shriving time allowed.
Not that I think you did not love your father,
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
No, no, he is dead.
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
Not of that dye which their investments show,
No more.
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
No more to undertake it, I will work him
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Now out of this--
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
Not when I saw 't.
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
Now wears his crown.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
No.
No more, sweet Hamlet!
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.
OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
OPHELIA  At home, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?
OPHELIA  Good my lord,
OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.
OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
OPHELIA  No more but so?
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!
OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.
OPHELIA  My lord?
OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
OPHELIA  No, my lord.
OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!
OPHELIA  Still better and worse.
OPHELIA  The King rises.
OPHELIA  What is, my lord?
OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?
OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?
OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.
OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
OPHELIA
OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA [sings]
OSRIC
OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.
OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?
OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.
OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--
OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!
OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
OSRIC  Nothing neither way.
OSRIC  Of Laertes?
OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.
OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?
OSRIC  Sir?
OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
OTHER  But is this law?
OTHER  Go to!
OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.
OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.
OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--
OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
OTHER  Was he a gentleman?
OTHER  Why, he had none.
OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.
OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
O, I am slain!
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
O, a pit of clay for to be made
Of bell and burial.
Of blue Olympus.
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
OSRIC
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
O heavy burden!
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Of general assault.
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
O, here they come.
Of him that brought them.
Of his affection to me.
Of his behavior.
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Of his true state.
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
Of man and country--
O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.
Of mighty opposites.
Of mine own eyes.
Of my true mother.
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
Of these dilated articles allow.
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
One fair daughter, and no more,
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]
On plots and errors happen.
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
O'er this solidity and compound mass
Of the unworthiest siege.
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
O, my dear lord--
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
O, say!
O, speak!
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
On such regards of safety and allowance
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
Oh, ho!
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Or for some frontier?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
Or not at all.
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
Osric to put on his hat.]
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
Or like a creature native and endued
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
Our son shall win.
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
Out of his brows.
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
O vengeance!
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
O, throw away the worser part of it,
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
One word more, good lady.
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
Over the nasty sty!
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.
POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
POLONIUS  Come, sirs.
POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?
POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.
POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.
POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?
POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
POLONIUS  I have, my lord.
POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
POLONIUS  I will say so.
POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.
POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.
POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.
POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.
POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.
POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.
POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
POLONIUS  This is too long.
POLONIUS  Upon my honor--
POLONIUS  Very like a whale.
POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.
POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?
POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?
POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?
POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.
POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  What said he?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  What do you think of me?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.
POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
PROLOGUE
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Passing through nature to eternity.
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Perpend.
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
Players exit.]
Players exit.]
Player Queen exits.]
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Play something like the murder of my father
Pleasant and helpful to him!
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Pointing to Polonius.]
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Polonius exits.]
Polonius.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius hides behind the arras.]
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
Pours the poison in his ears.]
Pray you, be round with him.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
Prepare to play.]
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Pursued my life.
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
QUEEN  Did he receive you well?
QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
QUEEN
QUEEN  How fares my lord?
QUEEN  If it be,
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  Ay, amen!
QUEEN
QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?
QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
QUEEN  I shall obey you.
QUEEN  It may be, very like.
QUEEN  More matter with less art.
QUEEN  So he does indeed.
QUEEN
QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.
QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
QUEEN  Ay me, what act
QUEEN  No more!
QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?
QUEEN
QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  What shall I do?
QUEEN
QUEEN  Alack,
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?
QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.
QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.
QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?
QUEEN  I will not speak with her.
QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
QUEEN  What would she have?
QUEEN
QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--
QUEEN
QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.
QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.
QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!
QUEEN  O my son, what theme?
QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
QUEEN  This is mere madness;
QUEEN
QUEEN
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Queen exits.]
Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.
REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.
REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  But, my good lord--
REYNALDO  I will, my lord.
REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.
REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.
REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
REYNALDO
REYNALDO  Good my lord.
REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO  Well, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.
ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.
ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.
ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.
ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?
ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
Rebellious hell,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
Repast them with my blood.
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Requite him for your father.
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
Richer than that which four successive kings
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rough-hew them how we will--
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
SAILOR  God bless you, sir.
SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
Sailors
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 5
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 5
Scene 6
Scene 7
Scene 1
Scene 2
Season your admiration for a while
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Shall in the general censure take corruption
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
She is a strumpet. What news?
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
She lifts the cup.]
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
She scatters flowers.]
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Should have a back or second that might hold
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
Sir, in this audience
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.
So bloodily hast struck?
So criminal and so capital in nature,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
So many journeys may the sun and moon
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
Sound a flourish.]
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
So, proceed you.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
So by my former lecture and advice
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Some little time, so by your companies
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
So horridly to shake our disposition
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
So levied as before, against the Polack,
So much as from occasion you may glean,
So much from th' understanding of himself
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
So oft it chances in particular men
So please you, something touching the Lord
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Speak, man.
Speak loudly for him.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Stick fiery off indeed.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
Such was the very armor he had on
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Swear by my sword.
Swear by my sword
THE GHOST
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
Than your particular demands will touch it.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
That I essentially am not in madness,
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
That I have longed long to redeliver.
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
That I might be the organ.
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
That I must call 't in question.
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
That capability and godlike reason
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
That, being of so young days brought up with him
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
That ever I was born to set it right!
Th' effect of what I wrote?
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
That from her working all his visage wanned,
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
That hath in it no profit but the name.
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
That he is open to incontinency;
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
That he which hath your noble father slain
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
That it might please you to give quiet pass
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
That makes calamity of so long life.
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Than to entreaty.
That might your nature, honor, and exception
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
That our devices still are overthrown;
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
That show of such an exercise may color
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
That she should lock herself from his resort,
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
That's the end.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
That thou so many princes at a shot
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
That thus he suffers for.
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
That to the use of actions fair and good
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
That was and is the question of these wars.
That we find out the cause of this effect,
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
That, if again this apparition come,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
That are so fortified against our story,
That treason can but peep to what it would,
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
That your good beauties be the happy cause
That youth and observation copied there,
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
The Other Man exits
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
The bell then beating one--
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
The canker galls the infants of the spring
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
The devil himself.
The devil take thy soul!
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
There is a willow grows askant the brook
Therefore, let's follow.
Therefore I have entreated him along
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
There lives within the very flame of love
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
These hands are not more like.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
They enter with Hamlet.]
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
The better to beguile. This is for all:
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
The head is not more native to the heart,
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The leprous distilment, whose effect
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
The need we have to use you did provoke
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
There is a play tonight before the King.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
The Queen falls.]
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
There, my lord.
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The hart ungalled play.
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
The instances that second marriage move
The instant burst of clamor that she made
The inward service of the mind and soul
The light and careless livery that it wears
The lists, and full proportions are all made
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
The origin and commencement of his grief
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
The rather if you could devise it so
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
The safety and the health of this whole state.
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
The single and peculiar life is bound
The soldier's music and the rite of war
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]
The terms of our estate may not endure
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
The triumph of his pledge.
The violence of either grief or joy
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
The which he loved passing well.
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
They shall go far with little.
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
The unseen good old man.
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
This above all: to thine own self be true,
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
This grave shall have a living monument.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
This man shall set me packing.
This marvel to you.
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Th' important acting of your dread command?
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
This night to play before him.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
They withdraw.]
This present object made probation.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
This realm dismantled was
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
This something-settled matter in his heart,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
This sudden sending him away must seem
This unprevailing woe and think of us
This warlike volley.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
Thou knowest already.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
Thus didst thou."
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Thus runs the world away.
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
Thy natural magic and dire property
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Till by some elder masters of known honor
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
Tis now the very witching time of night,
Tis strange.
Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
Tis too narrow for your mind.
To England send him, or confine him where
To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
To be commanded.
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
To be or not to be--that is the question:
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be your Valentine.
To both your honors.
To business with the King more than the scope
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Together with that fair and warlike form
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
To give it due content.
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
To give these mourning duties to your father.
To give the world assurance of a man.
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
To hear and see the matter.
To hear him so inclined.
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
To heaven.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
To him from whom you brought them.
To his confine, and of the truth herein
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
To his own scandal.
To his unmastered importunity.
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
To keep those many many bodies safe
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
To let this canker of our nature come
To let you know of it.
To make it truster of your own report
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
To mine own room again, making so bold
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
To offer it the show of violence,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
To punish me with this and this with me,
To put an antic disposition on)
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
To show my duty in your coronation,
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
To show yourself indeed your father's son
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.
To take him in the purging of his soul,
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
To tell my story.
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
To tell us this.
To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
To th' ambassadors of England gives
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
To the unsatisfied.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
To those of mine.
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
To what I shall unfold.
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
To muddy death.
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
To you alone.
To youth and liberty.
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
Treachery! Seek it out.
Truly deliver.
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Trumpets the while.]
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
Two Messengers
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
Upon my life, Lamord.
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
Upon my sword.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Upon whose property and most dear life
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
VOLTEMAND
VOLTEMAND
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]
We cannot get from him.
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Welcome, my good friends.
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
Well, we shall sift him.
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
We may of their encounter frankly judge
We must with all our majesty and skill
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
We shall express our duty in his eye;
We should do when we would; for this "would"
We should profane the service of the dead
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
We would not understand what was most fit,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
What I have said to you.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
What company, at what expense; and finding
What does this mean, my lord?
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
What is he whose grief
What is the issue of the business there.
What is the matter?
What is the reason that you use me thus?
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
What majesty should be, what duty is,
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
What think you on 't?
What thou hast said to me.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
What warlike noise is this?
What we have two nights seen.
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
When down her weedy trophies and herself
When he himself might his quietus make
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
When in your motion you are hot and dry
When it proved otherwise?
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
When second husband kisses me in bed.
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
When thou liest howling.
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
When we would bring him on to some confession
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
Where every god did seem to set his seal
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.
Where is your son?
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Where should we have our thanks?
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
Where, my lord?
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Where's your father?
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Where we shall find him most convenient.
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Which bewept to the ground did not go
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Which is not tomb enough and continent
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
Which now goes too free-footed.
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
Which was declining on the milky head
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
While one with moderate haste might tell a
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Whose blood and judgment are so well
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Whose do you think it was?
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
Who is 't that can inform me?
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Why does the drum come hither?
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Why, how now, Hamlet?
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Why to a public count I might not go
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Why this same strict and most observant watch
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
Will not debate the question of this straw.
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.
Will you be ruled by me?
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Will you two help to hasten them?
Winner and loser?
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
With all my imperfections on my head.
With all my love I do commend me to you,
With all the strength and armor of the mind
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
With heated visage, as against the doom,
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Within the center.
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
With this regard their currents turn awry
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
With a sore distraction. What I have done
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
With true-love showers.
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
Without debatement further, more or less,
Without more motive, into every brain
Without the sensible and true avouch
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
With variable objects, shall expel
With which she followed my poor father's body,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
Would have reverted to my bow again,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Yea, from the table of my memory
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Yes, faith, heartily.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
You cannot call it love, for at your age
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
You, as your business and desire shall point you
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
You go not till I set you up a glass
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
You do remember all the circumstance?
You have been talked of since your travel much,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
You know the wager?
You mainly were stirred up.
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
You are the most immediate to our throne,
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
You come most carefully upon your hour.
You do not understand yourself so clearly
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
You promised me to wed."
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Your wisdom best shall think.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
You must not put another scandal on him
You must not take for fire. From this time
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
about my heart. But it is no matter.
about of brains.
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
accent and good discretion.
ache to think on 't.
affair.
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
agreeing,
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
all after!
all "impawned," as you call it?
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
and Lords exit.]
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
and his load too.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
and more strange return. Hamlet.
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
and presently.
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
and then, you know,
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
are spent.
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
bastard,
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
beating. And, when you are asked this question
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
between
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
blood
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
body is and go with us to the King.
book,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
bounteous.
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
calf there.--Be the players ready?
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
capons so.
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
certain.
changes
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
choler.
closet ere you go to bed.
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
come by and by.
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
commeddled
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
conscience.
conscience
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]
could you not?
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
damned
daughter?
daughter that I love passing well.
daughter.
deceived.
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
delights not me"?
desert.
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
distempered.
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
drowned herself wittingly.
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
easiness.
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
edge.
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
ere you had done.
even, sir.--
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
except my life, except my life.
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
eyes.
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
fashion i' th' earth?
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
fee
fellowship in a cry of players?
figure?
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
fitted.
flattered?
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
foe,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]
foolish ear.
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
friend, look to 't.
friends.
from me to you.
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
further.
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
give you some violets, but they withered all when
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
good actor.
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.
grave-maker?
greenly
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
grown honest.
hadst thou!
halt for 't. What players are they?
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.
hath the daintier sense.
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
head.
head.
height,
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
heart,
hell,
hence
herself in her own defense?
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
her soul, she's dead.
her.
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
him
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
hither are they coming to offer you service.
hits.
hobby-horse is forgot."
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
hold their course for England; of them I have
home;
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
hours.
how express and admirable; in action how like
hundred.
if I could see the puppets dallying.
if philosophy could find it out.
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
in trial.
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
is--
it?
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
journeymen had made men, and not made them
keep,
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
know from what part of the world I should be
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.
knows,
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
legs.
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
letters for you.
liest.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
look upon me,
lord?
lost,
love, and by what more dear a better
love is too unmannerly.
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
matter there.
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
means of the late innovation.
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
me!
middle of her favors?
might,"
might it not?
might it not?
mine.
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
mischance
mischief.
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
more.
morning, 'twas then indeed.
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
most beautified Ophelia--
most best, believe it. Adieu.
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
mother's admiration? Impart.
mouth,
move
much to tell thee. Farewell.
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
music. Look you, these are the stops.
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
my complexion.
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
my father died. They say he made a good end.
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
nation
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
nature will.
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
night's speech.
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
noise?
northerly.
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
nothing more.
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
now.
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
offense i' th' world.
offense in 't?
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
of very liberal conceit.
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--
or a carpenter?"
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
ordnance are shot off.]
or so," and "gentleman."
our withers are unwrung.
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
out
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
own image, and the very age and body of the time
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
own life.
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
patience.
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
performance,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
played once i' th' university, you say?
players (as it is most like, if their means are
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
player went to cuffs in the question.
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.
play.
play.
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
progress through the guts of a beggar.
pronounced.
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
proverb is something musty.
purpose, confess thyself--
quaintly
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
question of the play be then to be considered.
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
quickly too. Farewell.
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
reading.
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
reason.
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
received it, and others whose judgments in such
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
recorders!
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
relish of it. I loved you not.
replication should be made by the son of a king?
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
revenge.
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
safely,
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
say,
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
shall be dry again.
shall be the end of my business.
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
shape of a camel?
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
sings in grave-making.
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
some frame and start not so wildly from my
so. To me, it is a prison.
something. Where did I leave?
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
sound,
so.
speak.
speak.
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
spheres,
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
stoup of liquor.
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
strew
struck her into amazement and admiration.
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
sword,
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
take longer time.
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
than with honesty?
that)
that I have bad dreams.
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
that often madness hits on, which reason and
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
that's for thoughts.
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
thee.
them, for there be of them that will themselves
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
them exclaim against their own succession?
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
the men are as mad as he.
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
their trial, the bubbles are out.
the shadow of a dream.
the stairs into the lobby.
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
them to controversy. There was for a while no
the author of affection, but called it an honest
them,
them.--
them.
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
these are the only men.
they ask you what it means, say you this:
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
them through and through the most fanned
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
this gentleman?
this line--let me see, let me see:
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
thoughts.
thought,
thousand tenants.
three-and-twenty years.
through the arras.]
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
thyself,
th' worst.
time. After your death you were better have a bad
tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
together
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.
torches.]
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
true. Let me question more in particular. What
truepenny?
turn.
twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
uncle,
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
unfellowed.
upon this pipe?
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
us
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
vile king,
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
villain!
voice of the King himself for your succession in
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
was an actor in Rome--
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
were to know himself.
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
what it means.
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
which your modesties have not craft enough to
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
whispers
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
wisdom
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
with me whether you were sent for or no.
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
with some Attendants.]
with the body. The King is a thing--
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
with us, sir.
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
with you.
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
with
words are not mine.
word, the word to the action, with this special
work?
work.	[Hurts the King.]
world to drown or hang themselves more than
worm.
would,"
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
year.
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
you?
you,
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
you.	[She exits.]
your bounty. Take them in.
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
you both?
you could go backward.
you down,
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?
you say--
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
you.
your smiling you seem to say so.
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
you love me, hold not off.

OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OPHELIA
OSRIC
OSRIC
CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
PROLOGUE
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
KING
HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
GENTLEMAN
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
PLAYER QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
QUEEN
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
CAPTAIN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
GUILDENSTERN
REYNALDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
BARNARDO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
HORATIO
MESSENGER
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
LAERTES
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
HAMLET
ACT 2
ACT 3
ACT 4
ACT 5
ACT 1
most beautified Ophelia--
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]
You promised me to wed."
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
HAMLET  Who, I?
VOLTEMAND
VOLTEMAND
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
PLAYER KING
DOCTOR
CORNELIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
POLONIUS
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
GHOST
THE GHOST
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
ROSENCRANTZ
Enter Ophelia.]
Enter Ophelia.]
time. After your death you were better have a bad
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
For Hecuba!
POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
And that our drift look through our bad
Enter Osric.]
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
We should profane the service of the dead
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Which was declining on the milky head
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
Where every god did seem to set his seal
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
An thou hadst not come to my bed."
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
O, my dear lord--
HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
A second time I kill my husband dead
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
ordnance are shot off.]
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
true. Let me question more in particular. What
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
Affront Ophelia.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
or so," and "gentleman."
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Unto that element. But long it could not be
As he in his particular act and place
Come, some music!
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Appears before them and with solemn march
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--
KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
MARCELLUS
LUCIANUS
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Sir, in this audience
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
The instant burst of clamor that she made
The lists, and full proportions are all made
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
Without the sensible and true avouch
KING  Why, now you speak
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
KING  Laertes, you shall hear
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
know from what part of the world I should be
OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
hence
Why this same strict and most observant watch
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
KING  Dead.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
No, no, he is dead.
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
her soul, she's dead.
In the same figure like the King that's dead.
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
With all my imperfections on my head.
head.
head.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
KING  Pretty Ophelia--
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--
HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
When second husband kisses me in bed.
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
closet ere you go to bed.
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
Go to thy deathbed.
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
To be commanded.
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
It is offended.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Stick fiery off indeed.
KING  O heavy deed!
KING  She swoons to see them bleed.
OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--
REYNALDO  But, my good lord--
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
HORATIO  How was this sealed?
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
HORATIO  That can I.
HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
And can you by no drift of conference
HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?
HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
HAMLET  How came he mad?
HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
An understanding simple and unschooled.
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
HORATIO  You might have rhymed.
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 5
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 5
Scene 6
Scene 7
Scene 1
Scene 2
QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?
And carriage of the article designed,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
Yes, it is already garrisoned.
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
Are joyfully returned.
LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
hundred.
Be all my sins remembered.
question of the play be then to be considered.
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
distempered.
HAMLET  Pale or red?
flattered?
A sable silvered.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
KING  Part them. They are incensed.
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
Which now goes too free-footed.
fitted.
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.
My father, in his habit as he lived!
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
LAERTES  He is justly served.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
Not shriving time allowed.
unfellowed.
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
HAMLET  Safely stowed.
A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
HORATIO  My lord, I did,
Come short of what he did.
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
Rough-hew them how we will--
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
QUEEN  Ay me, what act
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.
POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.
POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
QUEEN  So he does indeed.
QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
All from her father's death, and now behold!
LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
In the corrupted currents of this world,
That treason can but peep to what it would,
We should do when we would; for this "would"
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FRANCISCO
FIRST PLAYER
FIRST PLAYER
FORTINBRAS
FORTINBRAS
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
LAERTES  Know you the hand?
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
HAMLET  No, by this hand.
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
Importing the surrender of those lands
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.
HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
HAMLET  For England?
CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
And hath shipped me into the land,
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.
my father died. They say he made a good end.
That's the end.
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
Perpend.
KING  Attend!
As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
A little more than kin and less than kind.
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Tis too narrow for your mind.
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
And, like a man to double business bound,
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
It waves you to a more removed ground.
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
HORATIO  Friends to this ground.
HAMLET  Upon what ground?
sound,
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
HAMLET  O God!
LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?
POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?
HAMLET  Good.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.
Repast them with my blood.
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
HAMLET  That's wormwood!
Never to speak of this that you have heard.
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
bastard,
BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?
you could go backward.
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
LAERTES  My dread lord,
GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.
MARCELLUS  My good lord.
HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.
OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.
How is 't, my noble lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.
GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?
OPHELIA  My lord?
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.
POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.
KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
ALL  Armed, my lord.
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?
REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.
HORATIO  My lord, my lord!
ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?
OPHELIA  At home, my lord.
POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?
QUEEN  How fares my lord?
QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.
There, my lord.
Where, my lord?
HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.
HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.
HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.
POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
POLONIUS  I have, my lord.
OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.
MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.
REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.
REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.
REYNALDO  Well, my lord.
HORATIO  Well, my lord.
POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.
HORATIO  Very well, my lord.
HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.
REYNALDO  I will, my lord.
POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.
OPHELIA  No, my lord.
ALL  We do, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?
MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
OPHELIA  Good my lord,
REYNALDO  Good my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.
A truant disposition, good my lord.
HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.
HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.
ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.
POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.
POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?
OPHELIA  What is, my lord?
OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?
OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
HORATIO  What news, my lord?
ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?
HORATIO  What's that, my lord?
LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?
HORATIO  It might, my lord.
HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!
ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.
POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.
HORATIO  Ay, my lord.
LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?
OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?
GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.
OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.
lord?
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
The ratifiers and props of every word,
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
Swear by my sword.
sword,
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
BARNARDO  He.
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.
And what's untimely done. ...
QUEEN  If it be,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?
QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Get you a place.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
A double blessing is a double grace.
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
Gertrude.--
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.
hither are they coming to offer you service.
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
performance,
HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
As fits a king's remembrance.
You do remember all the circumstance?
More honored in the breach than the observance.
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
And call the noblest to the audience.
patience.
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
He closes with you in this consequence:
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
HAMLET  How long is that since?
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
A pickax and a spade, a spade,
And recks not his own rede.
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
KING, [aside]
LAERTES, [aside]
HAMLET, [aside]
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
He sheathes his sword.]
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
A combination and a form indeed
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
thee.
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
Indeed would make one think there might be
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
this line--let me see, let me see:
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
Methought it was very sweet
That makes calamity of so long life.
own life.
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
It was as I have seen it in his life,
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
Pursued my life.
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
except my life, except my life.
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
fee
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
The triumph of his pledge.
edge.
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
Of the unworthiest siege.
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
Tis strange.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
HAMLET  'Tis very strange.
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
revenge.
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
May sweep to my revenge.
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
I did repel his letters and denied
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
These hands are not more like.
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
I have a voice and precedent of peace
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Play something like the murder of my father
POLONIUS  What said he?
LAERTES, her brother
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
KING  But where is he?
QUEEN  It may be, very like.
KING  The doors are broke.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
HAMLET  Or like a whale.
POLONIUS  Very like a whale.
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Nay, very pale.
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
know not what we may be. God be at your table.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
HAMLET  Is 't possible?
HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!
HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
That, if again this apparition come,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.
POLONIUS  What do you think of me?
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Alack and fie for shame,
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
QUEEN  O my son, what theme?
All in the morning betime,
QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?
HAMLET  In happy time.
HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
O, here they come.
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?
I pray you, go with me.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
home;
Who is 't that can inform me?
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
look upon me,
But let this same be presently performed
But it reserved some quantity of choice
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
What thou hast said to me.
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
Speak to me.
Of his affection to me.
His access to me.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
LAERTES  Come, one for me.
HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
KING  The very same.
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
In noise so rude against me?
Will you be ruled by me?
QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
HAMLET  One.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.
Hamlet the Dane.
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
It will be short. The interim's mine,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
damned
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
From another one?
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
In honorable fashion--
Now I am alone.
OTHER  Why, he had none.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
You are the most immediate to our throne,
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?
HAMLET  From top to toe?
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
HORATIO  Half a share.
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
He falls to such perusal of my face
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Have you forgot me?
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
He that thou knowest thine,
He is dead and gone;
He is gone, he is gone,
That youth and observation copied there,
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?
HORATIO  'Tis here.
KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.
HAMLET  I would I had been there.
It had been so with us, had we been there.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?
KING  At supper where?
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?
It is most retrograde to our desire,
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
Never departed more.
No more.
QUEEN  No more!
One fair daughter, and no more,
QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
LAERTES  Think it no more.
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
Among a mineral of metals base,
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
So criminal and so capital in nature,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
LAERTES  What ceremony else?
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
OPHELIA  Still better and worse.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Let me be no assistant for a state,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Of his true state.
So far from cheer and from your former state,
ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
Th' effect of what I wrote?
Or like a creature native and endued
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.
My lord, I have.
LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
HAMLET  Into my grave?
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
conscience
I should have fatted all the region kites
KING  If it be so, Laertes
KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.
In youth when I did love, did love,
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
KING  But how hath she received his love?
Mad for thy love?
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
On such regards of safety and allowance
O, a pit of clay for to be made
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
you love me, hold not off.
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
with the body. The King is a thing--
the men are as mad as he.
uncle,
them through and through the most fanned
upon this pipe?
It is a poison tempered by himself.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
something. Where did I leave?
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
With variable objects, shall expel
give you some violets, but they withered all when
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
conscience.
delights not me"?
deceived.
continent of what part a gentleman would see.
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.
ere you had done.
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
foe,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.
figure?
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
When it proved otherwise?
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
The devil himself.
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
You cannot call it love, for at your age
MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?
HAMLET, [advancing]
reading.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
agreeing,
HAMLET  Nothing.
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
replication should be made by the son of a king?
sings in grave-making.
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
When thou liest howling.
In censure of his seeming.
I hear him coming.
HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?
POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
KING, [rising]
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
if I could see the puppets dallying.
POLONIUS  This is too long.
HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?
our withers are unwrung.
Whose grave's this, sirrah?
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
commeddled
herself in her own defense?
hath the daintier sense.
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
you both?
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
HAMLET  A whole one, I.
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
So bloodily hast struck?
Enter Ophelia distracted.]
Enter a Lord.]
Enter King and two or three.]
Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]
GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
For England.
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
For what advancement may I hope from thee
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
epitaph than their ill report while you live.
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
Should have a back or second that might hold
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
that often madness hits on, which reason and
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
If with too credent ear you list his songs
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
As of a man faithful and honorable.
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Bestow this place on us a little while.
BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
Gentlemen
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
For the supply and profit of our hope,
For every man hath business and desire,
For by the image of my cause I see
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
For art and exercise in your defense,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
As harbingers preceding still the fates
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
Characters in the Play
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
A noise within:] "Let her come in!"
A noise within.]
CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.
Do not, my lord.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
By Cock, they are to blame.
Come.
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
Capitol. Brutus killed me.
Can you advise me?
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
DOCTOR  No more be done.
At his heels a stone.
BARNARDO  'Tis here.
BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?
BARNARDO  Who's there?
Doubt thou the stars are fire,
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
But to confront the visage of offense?
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
And our affairs from England come too late.
GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
As it doth well appear unto our state)
As of a father; for let the world take note,
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
By desperate appliance are relieved
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
But never doubt I love.
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
HAMLET  As woman's love.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
Doubt that the sun doth move,
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
Being a thing immortal as itself?
At his head a grass-green turf,
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
BARNARDO  Long live the King!
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
An earnest conjuration from the King,
But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Did nothing.
BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
As kill a king?
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Believe so much in him that he is young,
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
As if I had never been such.
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
It may be death.
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
But that the dread of something after death,
And hears it roar beneath.
MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Let in the maid, that out a maid
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.
Most welcome home!
Must there no more be done?
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
My head should be struck off.
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
O, speak!
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
speak.
speak.
But what we do determine oft we break.
When he himself might his quietus make
QUEEN  Alack,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
A very very--pajock.
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
KING  Gertrude, do not drink.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
And let them know both what we mean to do
And, as I think, they have already order
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
mischance
morning, 'twas then indeed.
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
how express and admirable; in action how like
The need we have to use you did provoke
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Then up he rose and donned his clothes
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
And makes each petty arture in this body
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
more.
And live the purer with the other half!
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
To the unsatisfied.
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
To hear him so inclined.
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
To what I shall unfold.
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
What does this mean, my lord?
Upon my life, Lamord.
Upon my sword.
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
To offer it the show of violence,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
What is he whose grief
Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
They shall go far with little.
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.
To punish me with this and this with me,
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
To those of mine.
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
To be your Valentine.
To you alone.
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
What is the issue of the business there.
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
The safety and the health of this whole state.
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
There is a play tonight before the King.
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
As e'er my conversation coped withal.
Of bell and burial.
Christian burial.
Christian burial.
AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
And bear it to the chapel.
HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.
Season your admiration for a while
HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
In further evil?
KING  So you shall,
Or not at all.
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
hell,
OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.
OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.
QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
KING  It likes us well,
HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.
QUEEN  Did he receive you well?
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.
KING  Let him demand his fill.
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
HAMLET  I will.
ALL  We will, we will.
HORATIO  I warrant it will.
All flaxen was his poll.
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
To mine own room again, making so bold
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
To keep those many many bodies safe
Upon whose property and most dear life
Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
We may of their encounter frankly judge
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
HAMLET  O, wonderful!
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
HAMLET  Good madam.
Now falls on Priam.
But not where I have aimed them.
HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?
Of him that brought them.
them,
them.
For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!
HORATIO  Heavens secure him!
HORATIO  A piece of him.
OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Pray you, be round with him.
Pleasant and helpful to him!
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.
But not by him.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
HORATIO  Is it a custom?
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
If by direct or by collateral hand
HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
But to recover of us, by strong hand
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
It must be shortly known to him from England
OTHER  Was he a gentleman?
HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
No, my good lord, but as you did command
Put your dread pleasures more into command
O most pernicious woman!
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
QUEEN  Ay, amen!
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
As it hath used to do, that I have found
But, better looked into, he truly found
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?
Here's to thy health.
Have of your audience been most free and
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
As to expend your time with us awhile
Absent thee from felicity awhile
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
GHOST  My hour is almost come
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
How all occasions do inform against me
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
On plots and errors happen.
O, I am slain!
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
A Lord
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
But that I know love is begun by time
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Away, for everything is sealed and done
If there be any good thing to be done
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
By his cockle hat and staff
Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]
It sends some precious instance of itself
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
And sure I am two men there is not living
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
And that his soul may be as damned and black
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
me!
mine.
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
I bought an unction of a mountebank
As level as the cannon to his blank
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
His means of death, his obscure funeral
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
I will bestow him and will answer well
HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
No more to undertake it, I will work him
Did not together pluck such envy from him
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
wisdom
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
As oft as any passions under heaven
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
them to controversy. There was for a while no
KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
HORATIO  Is 't possible?
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
them, for there be of them that will themselves
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
mischief.
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
were to know himself.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This man shall set me packing.
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.
His silence will sit drooping.
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
He never gave commandment for their death.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
As the indifferent children of the earth.
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
mouth,
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
Most holy and religious fear it is
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
take longer time.
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
It beckons you to go away with it
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
The leprous distilment, whose effect
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
much to tell thee. Farewell.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
You must not take for fire. From this time
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
Whose violent property fordoes itself
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
received it, and others whose judgments in such
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
Whose blood and judgment are so well
journeymen had made men, and not made them
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
You must not put another scandal on him
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
him
between
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
Without more motive, into every brain
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
Your wisdom best shall think.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
When down her weedy trophies and herself
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
strew
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
I do believe you think what now you speak,
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
You do not understand yourself so clearly
The devil take thy soul!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
the shadow of a dream.
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
I pray you now receive them.
Will you two help to hasten them?
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
HORATIO  I did very well note him.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Speak loudly for him.
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
With heated visage, as against the doom,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
That I might be the organ.
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
KING  A Norman.
Shall I strike it with my partisan?
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
We must with all our majesty and skill
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This realm dismantled was
To th' ambassadors of England gives
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
To muddy death.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Denmark.
To his own scandal.
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
BARNARDO  Last night of all,
Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
The which he loved passing well.
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
To take him in the purging of his soul,
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
To him from whom you brought them.
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
This night to play before him.
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
We cannot get from him.
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Well, we shall sift him.
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
To let this canker of our nature come
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
To give the world assurance of a man.
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
What we have two nights seen.
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.
How does the Queen?
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
HAMLET  What woman then?
To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
KING  Will you know them, then?
How now, what hath befallen?
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
Come hither, gentlemen,
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
Unto our climatures and countrymen.
Enter Prologue.]
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
If his chief good and market of his time
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
To heaven.
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]
Enter King.]
I shall not look upon his like again.
He never will come again.
HAMLET  Nay, come again.
But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
your bounty. Take them in.
This is the very coinage of your brain.
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
The unseen good old man.
Is very cunning in.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]
England.
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]
Enter the Player King and Queen.]
Enter Queen.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
To put an antic disposition on)
Into a tow'ring passion.
them exclaim against their own succession?
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
This present object made probation.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
To show my duty in your coronation,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
struck her into amazement and admiration.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]
Enter Horatio.]
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
player went to cuffs in the question.
To be or not to be--that is the question:
my complexion.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
Ay, madam, it is common.
And his sandal shoon.
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
My custom always of the afternoon,
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
If it assume my noble father's person,
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!
them.--
these are the only men.
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.
HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
As therein are set down.
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
Now wears his crown.
No.
QUEEN  What shall I do?
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
turn.
The single and peculiar life is bound
So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
you down,
That our devices still are overthrown;
Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
Be ruled. You shall not go.
Help, ho!
That to the use of actions fair and good
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
your smiling you seem to say so.
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
To business with the King more than the scope
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
players (as it is most like, if their means are
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
Given private time to you, and you yourself
HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.
GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
HAMLET  I embrace it freely
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Give us the foils. Come on.
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
HAMLET  Saw who?
HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.
HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?
HAMLET  How if I answer no?
KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
KING  It shall be so.
OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
I think it be no other but e'en so.
I would not hear your enemy say so,
It would be spoke to.
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
So please you, something touching the Lord
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Swear by my sword
So by my former lecture and advice
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
To England send him, or confine him where
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
If I had played the desk or table-book
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Gravedigger's companion
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
I have in quick determination
GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
If damned custom have not brazed it so
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Gravedigger
ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?
HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
O vengeance!
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
HORATIO  Not from his
HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
so.
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
Must give us pause. There's the respect
Must render up myself.
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
Our son shall win.
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Oh, ho!
HAMLET  Between who?
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?
OPHELIA  No more but so?
POLONIUS  I will say so.
OTHER  Go to!
It warms the very sickness in my heart
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
KING  He made confession of you
HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
How should I your true love know
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Been struck so to the soul that presently
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.
HORATIO  E'en so.
HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
And let him know so.
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!
HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?
HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.
OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.
OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!
HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?
HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.
GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.
year.
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Doubt truth to be a liar,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
As if he had been loosed out of hell
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
And prey on garbage.
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.
ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
Richer than that which four successive kings
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
As from the body of contraction plucks
whispers
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
And how, and who, what means, and where they
And to the last bended their light on me.
And not have strewed thy grave.
And pious action we do sugar o'er
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
And that I see, in passages of proof,
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
And reason panders will.
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
And set a double varnish on the fame
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.
And we cast away moan.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
And so he goes to heaven,
And will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
And never come mischance between us twain.
And prologue to the omen coming on,
ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
As infinite as man may undergo,
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
And then it started like a guilty thing
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
And to the manner born, it is a custom
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
KING  Pluck them asunder.
HAMLET  Murder?
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.
HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
KING  Conceit upon her father.
Not that I think you did not love your father,
My lord, the King your father.
Requite him for your father.
My father--methinks I see my father.
HAMLET  The King my father?
Most throughly for my father.
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
Nay, come, let's go together.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
QUEEN  I will not speak with her.
GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.
HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
Of my true mother.
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.
HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!
Good night, mother.
HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
And hurt my brother.
QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
KING  How may we try it further?
Or for some frontier?
Scene 1
Scene 2
HAMLET  At supper.
POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
OSRIC  Sir?
It is a nipping and an eager air.
As if it some impartment did desire
HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?
HAMLET  Come on, sir.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
SAILOR  God bless you, sir.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Of his behavior.
Makes vow before his uncle never more
PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.
stoup of liquor.
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Have you so slander any moment leisure
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
spheres,
that I have bad dreams.
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
And there assume some other horrible form
GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
And, after, we will both our judgments join
And they in France of the best rank and station
According to the phrase or the addition
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
And for the day confined to fast in fires
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
And for your rapier most especial,
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
And I beseech you instantly to visit
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
And break your own neck down.
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
As by lot, God wot
Consent to swear.
A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
He likewise gives a frock or livery
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
But as we often see against some storm
But if the gods themselves did see her then
But I will delve one yard below their mines
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
And gave you such a masterly report
As it is common for the younger sort
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
And do such bitter business as the day
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
But he's an arrant knave.
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
And hath abatements and delays as many
ALL  Gentlemen!
And, as the world were now but to begin,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
ALL  No, let's come in!
And gem of all the nation.
ALL  Treason, treason!
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
And could of men distinguish, her election
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But age with his stealing steps
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
All given to mine ear.
And foreign mart for implements of war,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
And all we mourn for.
ALL  Our duty to your Honor.
And dupped the chamber door,
A station like the herald Mercury
KING  Alas, alas!
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
As low as to the fiends!
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
And passion in the gods.
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
that's for thoughts.
That your good beauties be the happy cause
that)
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
There lives within the very flame of love
The instances that second marriage move
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
The origin and commencement of his grief
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
So much from th' understanding of himself
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
Therefore I have entreated him along
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
That I am guiltless of your father's death
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
There is a willow grows askant the brook
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
This sudden sending him away must seem
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Together with that fair and warlike form
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
So oft it chances in particular men
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
With all the strength and armor of the mind
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Where is your son?
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
Such was the very armor he had on
When we would bring him on to some confession
MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
That might your nature, honor, and exception
beating. And, when you are asked this question
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
That I must call 't in question.
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
So many journeys may the sun and moon
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
Looking before and after, gave us not
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
King's jester.
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
It lifted up its head and did address
or a carpenter?"
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Mark me.
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
own image, and the very age and body of the time
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
More than in words?
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
That, being of so young days brought up with him
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
That he which hath your noble father slain
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
nation
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
To show yourself indeed your father's son
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Shall in the general censure take corruption
Than that which dearest father bears his son
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Which bewept to the ground did not go
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
love, and by what more dear a better
body is and go with us to the King.
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
Till by some elder masters of known honor
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
Some little time, so by your companies
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
That it might please you to give quiet pass
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
As one incapable of her own distress
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Which is not tomb enough and continent
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
pronounced.
matter there.
gentleman in our more rawer breath?
fashion i' th' earth?
in trial.
daughter that I love passing well.
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
That hath in it no profit but the name.
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
So excellent a king, that was to this
So levied as before, against the Polack,
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Speak, man.
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
accent and good discretion.
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.
blood
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
So horridly to shake our disposition
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
That thou so many princes at a shot
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
The violence of either grief or joy
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
her.
That I have longed long to redeliver.
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
The bell then beating one--
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
That thus he suffers for.
OPHELIA  The King rises.
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
KING  Good Laertes,
QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.
OSRIC  Of Laertes?
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?
Leaps in the grave.]
Lest with this piteous action you convert
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
Sound a flourish.]
Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
LAERTES  Well, again.
LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.
LAERTES  No.
LAERTES  Let this be so.
LAERTES  O, treble woe
LAERTES  Where is my father?
LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.
LAERTES  You mock me, sir.
LAERTES  None but his enemies.
Laertes,
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA [sings]
OPHELIA [sings]
And more above, hath his solicitings,
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
KING  Let's further think of this,
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
Look here upon this picture and on this,
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?
HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!
KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?
LAERTES  Why ask you this?
KING  What dost thou mean by this?
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.
As to peace-parted souls.
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
HORATIO  No, by no means.
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Is the main motive of our preparations,
KING  O, for two special reasons,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
HORATIO  That is most
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Larded all with sweet flowers;
POLONIUS  Come, sirs.
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
QUEEN  This is mere madness;
Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
It could not move thus.
KING  How long hath she been thus?
LAERTES, [to Claudius]
KING, [advancing with Polonius]
KING  Where is Polonius?
KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
Of blue Olympus.
How now? What news?
Out of his brows.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.
their trial, the bubbles are out.
I ha 't!
Is by a forged process of my death
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?
ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
thyself,
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
Two Messengers
To give these mourning duties to your father.
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
be one man picked out of ten thousand.
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
changes
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
To hear and see the matter.
What is the matter?
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
Sailors
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
Rebellious hell,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
and his load too.
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
To make it truster of your own report
To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
the author of affection, but called it an honest
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
out
Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
shape of a camel?
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
quickly too. Farewell.
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
greenly
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
quaintly
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
would,"
some frame and start not so wildly from my
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
this gentleman?
work.	[Hurts the King.]
word, the word to the action, with this special
world to drown or hang themselves more than
words are not mine.
work?
worm.
shall be dry again.
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.
means of the late innovation.
reason.
so. To me, it is a prison.
keep,
foolish ear.
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
progress through the guts of a beggar.
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
When in your motion you are hot and dry
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
You know the wager?
Where's your father?
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
further.
grave-maker?
Winner and loser?
all after!
daughter?
daughter.
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
about my heart. But it is no matter.
affair.
ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
would not much approve me. Well, sir?
with us, sir.
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
they ask you what it means, say you this:
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
With a sore distraction. What I have done
Within the center.
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Why to a public count I might not go
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
three-and-twenty years.
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Why does the drum come hither?
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
This heavy-headed revel east and west
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.
good actor.
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
certain.
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
capons so.
choler.
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
Yea, from the table of my memory
You come most carefully upon your hour.
With this regard their currents turn awry
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
You go not till I set you up a glass
Whose do you think it was?
friends.
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
more, for look where my abridgment comes.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
eyes.
legs.
What warlike noise is this?
To tell us this.
What majesty should be, what duty is,
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Where should we have our thanks?
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
Th' important acting of your dread command?
This is the very ecstasy of love,
This bodiless creation ecstasy
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
about of brains.
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
music. Look you, these are the stops.
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
That was and is the question of these wars.
recorders!
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
With true-love showers.
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
To both your honors.
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
middle of her favors?
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
hours.
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Without debatement further, more or less,
easiness.
shall be the end of my business.
She turns to favor and to prettiness.
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?
REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.
I must to England, you know that.
ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
Is thought-sick at the act.
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
Hamlet,
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.
How does my good Lord Hamlet?
KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
No more, sweet Hamlet!
KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!
KING  Ay, Hamlet.
POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Hold you the watch tonight?
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
KING  It falls right.
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.
HORATIO  Never believe it.
HAMLET  Do not believe it.
O, throw away the worser part of it,
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
with
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--
OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?
Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?
OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
March within.]
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--
Guildenstern.]
you.
the stairs into the lobby.
Giving them a paper.]
Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]
Elsinore?
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
through the arras.]
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
The Queen falls.]
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Ghost beckons.]
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
Fare you well, my dove.
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
FRANCISCO  Barnardo?
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
The insolence of office, and the spurns
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
And I the matter will reword, which madness
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]
HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.
HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
But with much forcing of his disposition.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
HAMLET  What's his weapon?
But, orderly to end where I begun:
HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
But let that go.
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
But in our circumstance and course of thought
HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
But you must know your father lost a father,
HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.
HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
But, to my mind, though I am native here
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
By laborsome petition, and at last
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.
HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
HAMLET  Hold off your hands.
HAMLET  Words, words, words.
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
HAMLET  This?
HAMLET  But where was this?
HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
Danish soldiers:
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
But keep a farm and carters.
Answer, and think upon this business.
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
hits.
As he is very potent with such spirits,
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And even the like precurse of feared events,
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Bring him before us.
Marcellus?
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
For your desire to know what is between us,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
you say--
They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
voice of the King himself for your succession in
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
They bore him barefaced on the bier,
The head and source of all your son's distemper.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
thoughts.
thousand tenants.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
bounteous.
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
She is a strumpet. What news?
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
LAERTES  I will do 't,
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
HAMLET  What?
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?
HAMLET  What did you enact?
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
That we find out the cause of this effect,
By letters congruing to that effect,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
and more strange return. Hamlet.
Speak to her, Hamlet.
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
Why, how now, Hamlet?
But you'll be secret?
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
height,
But I do prophesy th' election lights
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
BARNARDO  Well, good night.
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?
HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
That ever I was born to set it right!
And vanished from our sight.
thought,
of very liberal conceit.
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
fellowship in a cry of players?
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.
HAMLET  So be it.
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
Than your particular demands will touch it.
HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
But do not go with it.
offense in 't?
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
Heaven will direct it.
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.
KING  We will try it.
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.
HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
To lay our service freely at your feet,
Trumpets the while.]
Truly deliver.
Tis now the very witching time of night,
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
The Other Man exits
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
To let you know of it.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
it?
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
While one with moderate haste might tell a
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
And call it accident.
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
How in my words somever she be shent,
Where we shall find him most convenient.
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.
HAMLET  Judgment!
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Is not to stir without great argument,
This grave shall have a living monument.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
To give it due content.
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I doubt it is no other but the main--
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
In obstinate condolement is a course
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Doctor of Divinity
But truly I do fear it.
Not when I saw 't.
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
Did you not speak to it?
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
By this encompassment and drift of question
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.
LAERTES  O, fear me not.
HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
might it not?
might it not?
relish of it. I loved you not.
could you not?
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
ALL  My lord, from head to foot.
HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
The head is not more native to the heart,
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
This something-settled matter in his heart,
heart,
KING  I do not think 't.
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
In what particular thought to work I know not,
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
mother's admiration? Impart.
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
QUEEN  More matter with less art.
desert.
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
liest.
grown honest.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
th' worst.
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
A villain kills my father, and for that,
As will not leave their tinct.
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
What company, at what expense; and finding
Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
The inward service of the mind and soul
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
For what we know must be and is as common
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
together
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
vile king,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
The light and careless livery that it wears
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
villain!
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
We would not understand what was most fit,
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
If you desire to know the certainty
A noise within.]
A march afar off and shot within.]
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
For some must watch, while some must sleep:
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Farewell, dear mother.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Fortinbras.
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
For food and diet to some enterprise
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
For and a shrouding sheet,
For such a guest is meet.
For such a guest is meet.
FRANCISCO  Give you good night.
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
A face without a heart?
And I am sick at heart.
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
Enter a Messenger.]
Enter Gravedigger and Another.]
Enter Laertes with others.
Enter Osric, a courtier.]
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!
lost,
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
ache to think on 't.
What think you on 't?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.
HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
In second husband let me be accurst.
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
This unprevailing woe and think of us
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
us
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
was an actor in Rome--
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.
In general synod take away her power,
what it means.
which your modesties have not craft enough to
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
I have sworn 't.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
most best, believe it. Adieu.
I'll rant as well as thou.
hadst thou!
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
That I must be their scourge and minister.
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
Thy natural magic and dire property
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
Treachery! Seek it out.
So, proceed you.
HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
I will take my leave of you.
HORATIO  I beseech you.
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And he to England shall along with you.
QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
with you.
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
But let me hear from you.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.
What I have said to you.
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.
letters for you.
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
I'll visit you.
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?
KING  Who shall stay you?
you?
you,
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
hold their course for England; of them I have
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
Before my God, I might not this believe
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
And thy commandment all alone shall live
HAMLET  Nay, but to live
I could not but by her. The other motive
I do receive your offered love like love
And with no less nobility of love
Could not with all their quantity of love
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
In filial obligation for some term
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
My tables--meet it is I set it down
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
O'er this solidity and compound mass
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
HAMLET  Such an act
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
HAMLET  My fate cries out
HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
HAMLET  You are welcome.
HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?
HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!
HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
HAMLET  With drink, sir?
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
Of mighty opposites.
Of mine own eyes.
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
Have you any further trade with us?
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
O heavy burden!
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.
HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?
HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
HAMLET  I do beseech you.
HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?
HAMLET  I pray you.
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
It was about to speak when the cock crew.
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.
ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?
QUEEN  I shall obey you.
QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
Make you to ravel all this matter out
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
But I have that within which passes show,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
And with a larger tether may he walk
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
And my imaginations are as foul
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
And thus the native hue of resolution
Therefore, let's follow.
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
KING  Not that I know.
My lord, I'll hit him now.
HAMLET  What's the matter now?
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
LAERTES  Have at you now!
OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
As are companions noted and most known
HAMLET  What hour now?
HAMLET  If she should break it now!
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
His beard was as white as snow,
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
As if increase of appetite had grown
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
And in the porches of my ears did pour
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
noise?
night's speech.
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
And in this brainish apprehension kills
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
all "impawned," as you call it?
are spent.
And there I see such black and grained spots
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
offense i' th' world.
nature will.
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
And either ... the devil or throw him out
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
nothing more.
And in his grave rained many a tear.
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
Where you may see the inmost part of you.
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
With all my love I do commend me to you,
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
Will not debate the question of this straw.
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
and then, you know,
now.
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
How does your Honor for this many a day?
And it must follow, as the night the day,
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
The hart ungalled play.
KING  What do you call the play?
POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.
HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?
For they are actions that a man might play;
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
play.
play.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
O, say!
played once i' th' university, you say?
say,
KING  Give me some light. Away!
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
Thus runs the world away.
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
KING  O Gertrude, come away!
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
come by and by.
HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.
Here in the lobby.
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Here stooping to your clemency,
That he is open to incontinency;
HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
Thou knowest already.
calf there.--Be the players ready?
Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
One word more, good lady.
KING  How do you, pretty lady?
For us and for our tragedy,
That, opened, lies within our remedy.
For if the King like not the comedy,
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
With which she followed my poor father's body,
halt for 't. What players are they?
This warlike volley.
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
purpose, confess thyself--
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
HAMLET  Why,
HAMLET  Why,
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
safely,
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?
drowned herself wittingly.
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Yes, faith, heartily.
HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.
He digs up a skull.]
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Most free in his reply.
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
northerly.
love is too unmannerly.
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
Most constantly.
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
and presently.
POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
Forcing him to drink the poison.]
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
truepenny?
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]
She lifts the cup.]
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.
Handing him a paper.]
He gives a paper.]
He reads the letter.]
OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--
twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
POLONIUS  Upon my honor--
That capability and godlike reason
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
torches.]
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
Denmark?
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.
And let us once again assail your ears,
That I essentially am not in madness,
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Courtiers at the Danish court:
twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
Dost know this waterfly?
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
Directly seasons him his enemy.
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.
He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Polonius hides behind the arras.]
Is not this something more than fantasy?
OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
It came to pass, as most like it was--
HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]
O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Claudius rises.]
Enter King and Laertes.]
OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
I will go pray.
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Now out of this--
HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]
He falls.]
He digs up more skulls.]
Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
It spreads his arms.]
A flourish for the Players.]
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
None wed the second but who killed the first.
OTHER  But is this law?
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
OSRIC  Nothing neither way.
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Come, for England.	[He exits.]
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]
CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
He exits.]
you.	[She exits.]
QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
Player Queen exits.]
Queen exits.]
Horatio exits.]
Horatio exits.]
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Polonius exits.]
Hamlet exits.]
Hamlet exits.]
with some Attendants.]
King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
Cornelius.]
Pointing to Polonius.]
Polonius.]
He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
with me whether you were sent for or no.
He writes.]
Osric to put on his hat.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]
OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--
QUEEN  What would she have?
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
As day does to your eye.
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.
HAMLET  Why he more than another?
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?
And with a look so piteous in purport
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
HAMLET, [to Laertes]
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
He answers:
And drive his purpose into these delights.
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Of general assault.
ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.
And so have I a noble father lost,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
By indirections find directions out.
Collected from all simples that have virtue
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
Of these dilated articles allow.
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
Does by their own insinuation grow.
Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
That are so fortified against our story,
To tell my story.
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
is--
Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]
Pours the poison in his ears.]
Enter the Players with recorders.]
Enter Horatio and others.]
Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]
Enter a Messenger with letters.]
She scatters flowers.]
Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]
Enter the Players.]
Enter Sailors.]
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
He exits.]
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]
We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Ghost exits.]
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]
Enter Queen and Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Polonius.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]
Enter Lucianus.]
The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]
GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
GHOST  I find thee apt;
GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
They enter with Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
Enter Hamlet.]
might,"
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Passing through nature to eternity.
HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]
and Lords exit.]
Players exit.]
Players exit.]
Ghost and Hamlet exit.]
Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Giving to you no further personal power
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?
HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.
HAMLET  Whose was it?
HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
HAMLET  Of him, sir.
HAMLET  Nay, I know not.
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
move
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
From our achievements, though performed at
HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?
HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?
HAMLET  Why?
HAMLET  Ecstasy?
Than to entreaty.
To his unmastered importunity.
Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
They exit.]
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
The terms of our estate may not endure
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Welcome, my good friends.
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
To youth and liberty.
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
Armed, say you?
Anon, as patient as the female dove
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
And tell you what I know.
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
As England was his faithful tributary,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
And put it in his pocket--
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
Against the which a moiety competent
After the thing it loves.
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
And a most instant tetter barked about,
And I a maid at your window,
All my smooth body.
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]
All but the King exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
All but Hamlet exit.]
than with honesty?
HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Over the nasty sty!
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
In that and all things will we show our duty.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Thus didst thou."
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
They withdraw.]
Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--
LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]
Prepare to play.]
LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
The rather if you could devise it so
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]
The soldier's music and the rite of war
knows,
LAERTES  A Norman was 't?
if philosophy could find it out.
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
HAMLET  How "strangely"?
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
Of man and country--
But this eternal blazon must not be
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Gives me superfluous death.
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
And will not let belief take hold of him
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
fret me, you cannot play upon me.
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
You, as your business and desire shall point you
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
You mainly were stirred up.
And these few precepts in thy memory
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
And will not wrong it.
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Enter Ghost.]
Give him the cup.
Give me my father!
GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.
GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.
God bless you, sir.
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.
GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.
HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?
GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
For husband shalt thou--
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
friend, look to 't.
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?
From me, whose love was of that dignity
Good my lord, tell it.
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.
GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.
Give me one poor request.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
from me to you.
This marvel to you.
GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.
HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--
GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?
Guildenstern, and Lords.]
HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?
Francisco exits.]
HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Guildenstern and Attendants.]
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
God 'a mercy on his soul.
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
HAMLET  Are you fair?
HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?
HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
From the first corse till he that died today,
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
delight in, the tragedians of the city.
hobby-horse is forgot."
even, sir.--
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
proverb is something musty.
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
should admit no discourse to your beauty.
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]
Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]
Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]
Enter Rosencrantz.]
HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

Characters in the Play
======================
THE GHOST
HAMLET, Prince of Denmark, son of the late King Hamlet and Queen Gertrude
QUEEN GERTRUDE, widow of King Hamlet, now married to Claudius
KING CLAUDIUS, brother to the late King Hamlet
OPHELIA
LAERTES, her brother
POLONIUS, father of Ophelia and Laertes, councillor to King Claudius
REYNALDO, servant to Polonius
HORATIO, Hamlet's friend and confidant
Courtiers at the Danish court:
  VOLTEMAND
  CORNELIUS
  ROSENCRANTZ
  GUILDENSTERN
  OSRIC
  Gentlemen
  A Lord
Danish soldiers:
  FRANCISCO
  BARNARDO
  MARCELLUS
FORTINBRAS, Prince of Norway
A Captain in Fortinbras's army
Ambassadors to Denmark from England
Players who take the roles of Prologue, Player King, Player Queen, and Lucianus in <title>The Murder of Gonzago</title>
Two Messengers
Sailors
Gravedigger
Gravedigger's companion
Doctor of Divinity
Attendants, Lords, Guards, Musicians, Laertes's Followers, Soldiers, Officers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Barnardo and Francisco, two sentinels.]


BARNARDO  Who's there?

FRANCISCO
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.

BARNARDO  Long live the King!

FRANCISCO  Barnardo?

BARNARDO  He.

FRANCISCO
You come most carefully upon your hour.

BARNARDO
'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.

FRANCISCO
For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.

BARNARDO  Have you had quiet guard?

FRANCISCO  Not a mouse stirring.

BARNARDO  Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


FRANCISCO
I think I hear them.--Stand ho! Who is there?

HORATIO  Friends to this ground.

MARCELLUS  And liegemen to the Dane.

FRANCISCO  Give you good night.

MARCELLUS
O farewell, honest soldier. Who hath relieved
you?

FRANCISCO
Barnardo hath my place. Give you good night.
[Francisco exits.]

MARCELLUS  Holla, Barnardo.

BARNARDO  Say, what, is Horatio there?

HORATIO  A piece of him.

BARNARDO
Welcome, Horatio.--Welcome, good Marcellus.

HORATIO
What, has this thing appeared again tonight?

BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.

MARCELLUS
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

HORATIO
Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

BARNARDO  Sit down awhile,
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we have two nights seen.

HORATIO  Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.

BARNARDO  Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one--

[Enter Ghost.]


MARCELLUS
Peace, break thee off! Look where it comes again.

BARNARDO
In the same figure like the King that's dead.

MARCELLUS, [to Horatio]
Thou art a scholar. Speak to it, Horatio.

BARNARDO
Looks he not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.

HORATIO
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.

BARNARDO
It would be spoke to.

MARCELLUS  Speak to it, Horatio.

HORATIO
What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
Together with that fair and warlike form
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven, I charge thee,
speak.

MARCELLUS
It is offended.

BARNARDO  See, it stalks away.

HORATIO
Stay! speak! speak! I charge thee, speak!
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone and will not answer.

BARNARDO
How now, Horatio, you tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on 't?

HORATIO
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.

MARCELLUS  Is it not like the King?

HORATIO  As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armor he had on
When he the ambitious Norway combated.
So frowned he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.

MARCELLUS
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

HORATIO
In what particular thought to work I know not,
But in the gross and scope of mine opinion
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

MARCELLUS
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war,
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint laborer with the day?
Who is 't that can inform me?

HORATIO  That can I.
At least the whisper goes so: our last king,
Whose image even but now appeared to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride,
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a sealed compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror.
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king, which had returned
To the inheritance of Fortinbras
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
And carriage of the article designed,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
Sharked up a list of lawless resolutes
For food and diet to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in 't; which is no other
(As it doth well appear unto our state)
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
So by his father lost. And this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this posthaste and rummage in the land.

BARNARDO
I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch so like the king
That was and is the question of these wars.

HORATIO
A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of feared events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,
Have heaven and Earth together demonstrated
Unto our climatures and countrymen.

[Enter Ghost.]

But soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it though it blast me.--Stay, illusion!
[It spreads his arms.]
If thou hast any sound or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done
That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
Speak of it.	[The cock crows.]
Stay and speak!--Stop it, Marcellus.

MARCELLUS
Shall I strike it with my partisan?

HORATIO  Do, if it will not stand.

BARNARDO  'Tis here.

HORATIO  'Tis here.
[Ghost exits.]

MARCELLUS  'Tis gone.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence,
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.

BARNARDO
It was about to speak when the cock crew.

HORATIO
And then it started like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day, and at his warning,
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine, and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.

MARCELLUS
It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Savior's birth is celebrated,
This bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is that time.

HORATIO
So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn in russet mantle clad
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen tonight
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

MARCELLUS
Let's do 't, I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most convenient.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the
Queen, the Council, as Polonius, and his son Laertes,
Hamlet, with others, among them Voltemand and
Cornelius.]


KING
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we (as 'twere with a defeated joy,
With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole)
Taken to wife. Nor have we herein barred
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows that you know. Young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not failed to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
To our most valiant brother--so much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow.
[Giving them a paper.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.

CORNELIUS/VOLTEMAND
In that and all things will we show our duty.

KING
We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is 't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg,
Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

LAERTES  My dread lord,
Your leave and favor to return to France,
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

KING
Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

POLONIUS
Hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
By laborsome petition, and at last
Upon his will I sealed my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.

KING
Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will.--
But now, my cousin Hamlet and my son--

HAMLET, [aside]
A little more than kin and less than kind.

KING
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

HAMLET
Not so, my lord; I am too much in the sun.

QUEEN
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not forever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

HAMLET
Ay, madam, it is common.

QUEEN  If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

HAMLET
"Seems," madam? Nay, it is. I know not "seems."
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed "seem,"
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passes show,
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

KING
'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature,
Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your father.
But you must know your father lost a father,
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief.
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschooled.
For what we know must be and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, 'tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died today,
"This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth
This unprevailing woe and think of us
As of a father; for let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire,
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

QUEEN
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee, stay with us. Go not to Wittenberg.

HAMLET
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

KING
Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark.--Madam, come.
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof
No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
[Flourish. All but Hamlet exit.]

HAMLET
O, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew,
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God, God,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on 't, ah fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed. Things rank and gross in nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead--nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth,
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on. And yet, within a month
(Let me not think on 't; frailty, thy name is woman!),
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body,
Like Niobe, all tears--why she, even she
(O God, a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourned longer!), married with my
uncle,
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

[Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Barnardo.]


HORATIO  Hail to your Lordship.

HAMLET  I am glad to see you well.
Horatio--or I do forget myself!

HORATIO
The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

HAMLET
Sir, my good friend. I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?--
Marcellus?

MARCELLUS  My good lord.

HAMLET
I am very glad to see you. [To Barnardo.] Good
even, sir.--
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

HORATIO
A truant disposition, good my lord.

HAMLET
I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HORATIO
My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

HAMLET
I prithee, do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

HORATIO
Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.

HAMLET
Thrift, thrift, Horatio. The funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father--methinks I see my father.

HORATIO
Where, my lord?

HAMLET  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HORATIO
I saw him once. He was a goodly king.

HAMLET
He was a man. Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HORATIO
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAMLET  Saw who?

HORATIO
My lord, the King your father.

HAMLET  The King my father?

HORATIO
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen
This marvel to you.

HAMLET  For God's love, let me hear!

HORATIO
Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pie,
Appears before them and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walked
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes
Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch,
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing (each word made true and good),
The apparition comes. I knew your father;
These hands are not more like.

HAMLET  But where was this?

MARCELLUS
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.

HAMLET
Did you not speak to it?

HORATIO  My lord, I did,
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up its head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
And vanished from our sight.

HAMLET  'Tis very strange.

HORATIO
As I do live, my honored lord, 'tis true.
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAMLET  Indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

ALL  We do, my lord.

HAMLET
Armed, say you?

ALL  Armed, my lord.

HAMLET  From top to toe?

ALL  My lord, from head to foot.

HAMLET  Then saw you not his face?

HORATIO
O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

HAMLET  What, looked he frowningly?

HORATIO
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAMLET  Pale or red?

HORATIO
Nay, very pale.

HAMLET  And fixed his eyes upon you?

HORATIO
Most constantly.

HAMLET  I would I had been there.

HORATIO  It would have much amazed you.

HAMLET  Very like. Stayed it long?

HORATIO
While one with moderate haste might tell a
hundred.

BARNARDO/MARCELLUS  Longer, longer.

HORATIO
Not when I saw 't.

HAMLET  His beard was grizzled, no?

HORATIO
It was as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silvered.

HAMLET  I will watch tonight.
Perchance 'twill walk again.

HORATIO  I warrant it will.

HAMLET
If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsomever else shall hap tonight,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.

ALL  Our duty to your Honor.

HAMLET
Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
My father's spirit--in arms! All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then, sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's
eyes.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Laertes and Ophelia, his sister.]


LAERTES
My necessaries are embarked. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convey is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.

OPHELIA  Do you doubt that?

LAERTES
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favor,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
The perfume and suppliance of a minute,
No more.

OPHELIA  No more but so?

LAERTES  Think it no more.
For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
The inward service of the mind and soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
The virtue of his will; but you must fear,
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own,
For he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends
The safety and the health of this whole state.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that body
Whereof he is the head. Then, if he says he loves
you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
As he in his particular act and place
May give his saying deed, which is no further
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain
If with too credent ear you list his songs
Or lose your heart or your chaste treasure open
To his unmastered importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia; fear it, my dear sister,
And keep you in the rear of your affection,
Out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
If she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
And, in the morn and liquid dew of youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary, then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

OPHELIA
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep
As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine,
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
And recks not his own rede.

LAERTES  O, fear me not.

[Enter Polonius.]

I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace.
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

POLONIUS
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are stayed for. There, my blessing with
thee.
And these few precepts in thy memory
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel,
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
Of each new-hatched, unfledged courage. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel, but, being in,
Bear 't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice.
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
But not expressed in fancy (rich, not gaudy),
For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
And they in France of the best rank and station
Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be,
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all: to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee.

LAERTES
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

POLONIUS
The time invests you. Go, your servants tend.

LAERTES
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.

OPHELIA  'Tis in my memory locked,
And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

LAERTES  Farewell.	[Laertes exits.]

POLONIUS
What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?

OPHELIA
So please you, something touching the Lord
Hamlet.

POLONIUS  Marry, well bethought.
'Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you, and you yourself
Have of your audience been most free and
bounteous.
If it be so (as so 'tis put on me,
And that in way of caution), I must tell you
You do not understand yourself so clearly
As it behooves my daughter and your honor.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.

OPHELIA
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Of his affection to me.

POLONIUS
Affection, puh! You speak like a green girl
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?

OPHELIA
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

POLONIUS
Marry, I will teach you. Think yourself a baby
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
Or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.

OPHELIA
My lord, he hath importuned me with love
In honorable fashion--

POLONIUS
Ay, "fashion" you may call it. Go to, go to!

OPHELIA
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

POLONIUS
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both
Even in their promise as it is a-making,
You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Than a command to parle. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk
Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,
Not of that dye which their investments show,
But mere implorators of unholy suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Have you so slander any moment leisure
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
Look to 't, I charge you. Come your ways.

OPHELIA  I shall obey, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.]


HAMLET
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

HORATIO
It is a nipping and an eager air.

HAMLET  What hour now?

HORATIO  I think it lacks of twelve.

MARCELLUS  No, it is struck.

HORATIO
Indeed, I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
[A flourish of trumpets and two pieces goes off.]
What does this mean, my lord?

HAMLET
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels;
And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his pledge.

HORATIO  Is it a custom?

HAMLET  Ay, marry, is 't,
But, to my mind, though I am native here
And to the manner born, it is a custom
More honored in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations.
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase
Soil our addition. And, indeed, it takes
From our achievements, though performed at
height,
The pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
As in their birth (wherein they are not guilty,
Since nature cannot choose his origin),
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion
(Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason),
Or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
The form of plausive manners--that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
Being nature's livery or fortune's star,
His virtues else, be they as pure as grace,
As infinite as man may undergo,
Shall in the general censure take corruption
From that particular fault. The dram of evil
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
To his own scandal.

[Enter Ghost.]


HORATIO  Look, my lord, it comes.

HAMLET
Angels and ministers of grace, defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from
hell,
Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. I'll call thee "Hamlet,"
"King," "Father," "Royal Dane." O, answer me!
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred,
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws
To cast thee up again. What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition
With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
[Ghost beckons.]

HORATIO
It beckons you to go away with it
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.

MARCELLUS  Look with what courteous action
It waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it.

HORATIO  No, by no means.

HAMLET
It will not speak. Then I will follow it.

HORATIO
Do not, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee.
And for my soul, what can it do to that,
Being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.

HORATIO
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord?
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
And draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar beneath.

HAMLET
It waves me still.--Go on, I'll follow thee.

MARCELLUS
You shall not go, my lord.	[They hold back Hamlet.]

HAMLET  Hold off your hands.

HORATIO
Be ruled. You shall not go.

HAMLET  My fate cries out
And makes each petty arture in this body
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
Still am I called. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
I say, away!--Go on. I'll follow thee.
[Ghost and Hamlet exit.]

HORATIO
He waxes desperate with imagination.

MARCELLUS
Let's follow. 'Tis not fit thus to obey him.

HORATIO
Have after. To what issue will this come?

MARCELLUS
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

HORATIO
Heaven will direct it.

MARCELLUS  Nay, let's follow him.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Ghost and Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak. I'll go no
further.

GHOST
Mark me.

HAMLET  I will.

GHOST  My hour is almost come
When I to sulf'rous and tormenting flames
Must render up myself.

HAMLET  Alas, poor ghost!

GHOST
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.

HAMLET  Speak. I am bound to hear.

GHOST
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

HAMLET  What?

GHOST  I am thy father's spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
And for the day confined to fast in fires
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their
spheres,
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like quills upon the fearful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

HAMLET  O God!

GHOST
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

HAMLET  Murder?

GHOST
Murder most foul, as in the best it is,
But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

HAMLET
Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift
As meditation or the thoughts of love,
May sweep to my revenge.

GHOST  I find thee apt;
And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
A serpent stung me. So the whole ear of Denmark
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused. But know, thou noble youth,
The serpent that did sting thy father's life
Now wears his crown.

HAMLET  O, my prophetic soul! My uncle!

GHOST
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
With witchcraft of his wits, with traitorous gifts--
O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O Hamlet, what a falling off was there!
From me, whose love was of that dignity
That it went hand in hand even with the vow
I made to her in marriage, and to decline
Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
To those of mine.
But virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
So, lust, though to a radiant angel linked,
Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage.
But soft, methinks I scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
My custom always of the afternoon,
Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole
With juice of cursed hebona in a vial
And in the porches of my ears did pour
The leprous distilment, whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of man
That swift as quicksilver it courses through
The natural gates and alleys of the body,
And with a sudden vigor it doth posset
And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine,
And a most instant tetter barked about,
Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
All my smooth body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatched,
Cut off, even in the blossoms of my sin,
Unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled,
No reck'ning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head.
O horrible, O horrible, most horrible!
If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
A couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsomever thou pursues this act,
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu. Remember me.	[He exits.]

HAMLET
O all you host of heaven! O Earth! What else?
And shall I couple hell? O fie! Hold, hold, my heart,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
I'll wipe away all trivial, fond records,
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
That youth and observation copied there,
And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain,
Unmixed with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables--meet it is I set it down
That one may smile and smile and be a villain.
At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
[He writes.]
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word.
It is "adieu, adieu, remember me."
I have sworn 't.

[Enter Horatio and Marcellus.]


HORATIO  My lord, my lord!

MARCELLUS  Lord Hamlet.

HORATIO  Heavens secure him!

HAMLET  So be it.

MARCELLUS  Illo, ho, ho, my lord!

HAMLET  Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come!

MARCELLUS
How is 't, my noble lord?

HORATIO  What news, my lord?

HAMLET  O, wonderful!

HORATIO
Good my lord, tell it.

HAMLET  No, you will reveal it.

HORATIO
Not I, my lord, by heaven.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord.

HAMLET
How say you, then? Would heart of man once think
it?
But you'll be secret?

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   Ay, by heaven, my lord.

HAMLET
There's never a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But he's an arrant knave.

HORATIO
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
To tell us this.

HAMLET  Why, right, you are in the right.
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it fit that we shake hands and part,
You, as your business and desire shall point you
(For every man hath business and desire,
Such as it is), and for my own poor part,
I will go pray.

HORATIO
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

HAMLET
I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Yes, faith, heartily.

HORATIO  There's no offense, my lord.

HAMLET
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
And much offense, too. Touching this vision here,
It is an honest ghost--that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.

HORATIO  What is 't, my lord? We will.

HAMLET
Never make known what you have seen tonight.

HORATIO/MARCELLUS   My lord, we will not.

HAMLET  Nay, but swear 't.

HORATIO  In faith, my lord, not I.

MARCELLUS  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

HAMLET
Upon my sword.

MARCELLUS  We have sworn, my lord, already.

HAMLET  Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

GHOST [cries under the stage]  Swear.

HAMLET
Ha, ha, boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there,
truepenny?
Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.

HORATIO  Propose the oath, my lord.

HAMLET
Never to speak of this that you have seen,
Swear by my sword.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword.
Swear by my sword
Never to speak of this that you have heard.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear by his sword.

HAMLET
Well said, old mole. Canst work i' th' earth so fast?--
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

HORATIO
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

HAMLET
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
How strange or odd some'er I bear myself
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an antic disposition on)
That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
With arms encumbered thus, or this headshake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
As "Well, well, we know," or "We could an if we
would,"
Or "If we list to speak," or "There be an if they
might,"
Or such ambiguous giving-out, to note
That you know aught of me--this do swear,
So grace and mercy at your most need help you.

GHOST, [beneath]  Swear.

HAMLET
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit.--So, gentlemen,
With all my love I do commend me to you,
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
May do t' express his love and friending to you,
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
That ever I was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]


POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS
"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
or so," and "gentleman."

POLONIUS
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS  What said he?

OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.]


KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!

QUEEN  Ay, amen!
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.

KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
[Polonius exits.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.

QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main--
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

KING
Well, we shall sift him.

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.]

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[He gives a paper.]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
most beautified Ophelia--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
[He reads the letter.]
	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
	Doubt truth to be a liar,
	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING  But how hath she received his love?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.

POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?

KING  Not that I know.

POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.

KING  How may we try it further?

POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

POLONIUS
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING  We will try it.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]


QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.

POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
daughter?

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to 't.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET  Between who?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET  Into my grave?

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
I will take my leave of you.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]


POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
[Polonius exits.]

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?

ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
grown honest.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
th' worst.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
'Tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
you love me, hold not off.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
delights not me"?

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for 't. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
and his load too.

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
[A flourish for the Players.]

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, 'twas then indeed.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome--

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	One fair daughter, and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
	It came to pass, as most like it was--
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

[Enter the Players.]

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line--let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.

FIRST PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!

POLONIUS  This is too long.

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

FIRST PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
could you not?

FIRST PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.]


KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.]

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
[Queen exits.]

POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
[They withdraw.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.

OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.

HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

OPHELIA  My lord?

HAMLET  Are you fair?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

KING, [advancing with Polonius]
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]


HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
[Players exit.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

[Enter Horatio.]


HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

HORATIO
O, my dear lord--

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
[Sound a flourish.]

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
torches.]


KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
played once i' th' university, you say?

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.

HAMLET  What did you enact?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
Capitol. Brutus killed me.

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.--Be the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
legs.

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

HAMLET  Nothing.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET  Who, I?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
hours.

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot."
[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
[Players exit.]

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

[Enter Prologue.]


HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
what it means.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
play.

PROLOGUE
	For us and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET  As woman's love.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]


PLAYER KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--

PLAYER QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

PLAYER QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

PLAYER KING
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

PLAYER QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
[Player Queen exits.]

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in 't?

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i' th' world.

KING  What do you call the play?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

[Enter Lucianus.]

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
[Pours the poison in his ears.]

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
[Claudius rises.]

OPHELIA  The King rises.

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

HAMLET
	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
	   The hart ungalled play.
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	   This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
	   A very very--pajock.

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
	For if the King like not the comedy,
	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]


GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say--

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother's admiration? Impart.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
proverb is something musty.

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET  I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

[Enter Polonius.]

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
shape of a camel?

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
come by and by.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
'Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]


KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
[Polonius exits.]
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
[He sheathes his sword.]
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Queen and Polonius.]


POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

QUEEN
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

QUEEN
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
O, I am slain!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN
As kill a king?

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--

QUEEN  No more!

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

[Enter Ghost.]

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
figure?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
[Ghost exits.]

QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[Pointing to Polonius.]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN  What shall I do?

HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.

QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King and Queen, with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern.]


KING
There's matter in these sighs; these profound heaves
You must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?

QUEEN
Bestow this place on us a little while.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen tonight!

KING  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

QUEEN
Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit,
Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries "A rat, a rat,"
And in this brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.

KING  O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all--
To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But, like the owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

QUEEN
To draw apart the body he hath killed,
O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
Among a mineral of metals base,
Shows itself pure: he weeps for what is done.

KING  O Gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
But we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
We must with all our majesty and skill
Both countenance and excuse.--Ho, Guildenstern!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]

Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his mother's closet hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
And let them know both what we mean to do
And what's untimely done. ...
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
As level as the cannon to his blank
Transports his poisoned shot, may miss our name
And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Safely stowed.

GENTLEMEN, [within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

HAMLET  But soft, what noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
O, here they come.

[Enter Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


ROSENCRANTZ
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

HAMLET
Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

ROSENCRANTZ
Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
And bear it to the chapel.

HAMLET  Do not believe it.

ROSENCRANTZ  Believe what?

HAMLET  That I can keep your counsel and not mine
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, what
replication should be made by the son of a king?

ROSENCRANTZ  Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, that soaks up the King's countenance,
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
King best service in the end. He keeps them like an
ape an apple in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed,
to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
shall be dry again.

ROSENCRANTZ  I understand you not, my lord.

HAMLET  I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a
foolish ear.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you must tell us where the
body is and go with us to the King.

HAMLET  The body is with the King, but the King is not
with the body. The King is a thing--

GUILDENSTERN  A "thing," my lord?

HAMLET  Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and
all after!
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King and two or three.]


KING
I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
And, where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed,
But never the offense. To bear all smooth and even,
This sudden sending him away must seem
Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
By desperate appliance are relieved
Or not at all.

[Enter Rosencrantz.]

How now, what hath befallen?

ROSENCRANTZ
Where the dead body is bestowed, my lord,
We cannot get from him.

KING  But where is he?

ROSENCRANTZ
Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

KING
Bring him before us.

ROSENCRANTZ  Ho! Bring in the lord.

[They enter with Hamlet.]


KING  Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

HAMLET  At supper.

KING  At supper where?

HAMLET  Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at
him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet. We
fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves
for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is
but variable service--two dishes but to one table.
That's the end.

KING  Alas, alas!

HAMLET  A man may fish with the worm that hath eat
of a king and eat of the fish that hath fed of that
worm.

KING  What dost thou mean by this?

HAMLET  Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
progress through the guts of a beggar.

KING  Where is Polonius?

HAMLET  In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger
find him not there, seek him i' th' other
place yourself. But if, indeed, you find him not
within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stairs into the lobby.

KING, [to Attendants.]  Go, seek him there.

HAMLET  He will stay till you come.	[Attendants exit.]

KING
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety
(Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done) must send thee
hence
With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
Th' associates tend, and everything is bent
For England.

HAMLET  For England?

KING  Ay, Hamlet.

HAMLET  Good.

KING
So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

HAMLET
I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for
England.
Farewell, dear mother.

KING  Thy loving father, Hamlet.

HAMLET
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife,
Man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.--
Come, for England.	[He exits.]

KING
Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not. I'll have him hence tonight.
Away, for everything is sealed and done
That else leans on th' affair. Pray you, make haste.
[All but the King exit.]
And England, if my love thou hold'st at aught
(As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to us), thou mayst not coldly set
Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
By letters congruing to that effect,
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,
For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done,
Howe'er my haps, my joys will ne'er begin.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Fortinbras with his army over the stage.]


FORTINBRAS
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
Craves the conveyance of a promised march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his Majesty would aught with us,
We shall express our duty in his eye;
And let him know so.

CAPTAIN  I will do 't, my lord.

FORTINBRAS  Go softly on.	[All but the Captain exit.]

[Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and others.]


HAMLET  Good sir, whose powers are these?

CAPTAIN  They are of Norway, sir.

HAMLET  How purposed, sir, I pray you?

CAPTAIN  Against some part of Poland.

HAMLET  Who commands them, sir?

CAPTAIN
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.

HAMLET
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
Or for some frontier?

CAPTAIN
Truly to speak, and with no addition,
We go to gain a little patch of ground
That hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

HAMLET
Why, then, the Polack never will defend it.

CAPTAIN
Yes, it is already garrisoned.

HAMLET
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' impostume of much wealth and peace,
That inward breaks and shows no cause without
Why the man dies.--I humbly thank you, sir.

CAPTAIN  God be wi' you, sir.	[He exits.]

ROSENCRANTZ  Will 't please you go, my lord?

HAMLET
I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
How all occasions do inform against me
And spur my dull revenge. What is a man
If his chief good and market of his time
Be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure He that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not
That capability and godlike reason
To fust in us unused. Now whether it be
Bestial oblivion or some craven scruple
Of thinking too precisely on th' event
(A thought which, quartered, hath but one part
wisdom
And ever three parts coward), I do not know
Why yet I live to say "This thing's to do,"
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
To do 't. Examples gross as Earth exhort me:
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
Led by a delicate and tender prince,
Whose spirit with divine ambition puffed
Makes mouths at the invisible event,
Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
Is not to stir without great argument,
But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
When honor's at the stake. How stand I, then,
That have a father killed, a mother stained,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep, while to my shame I see
The imminent death of twenty thousand men
That for a fantasy and trick of fame
Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
Which is not tomb enough and continent
To hide the slain? O, from this time forth
My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth!
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.]


QUEEN  I will not speak with her.

GENTLEMAN  She is importunate,
Indeed distract; her mood will needs be pitied.

QUEEN  What would she have?

GENTLEMAN
She speaks much of her father, says she hears
There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her
heart,
Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt
That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection. They aim at it
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield
them,
Indeed would make one think there might be
thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

HORATIO
'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

QUEEN  Let her come in.	[Gentleman exits.]
[Aside.] To my sick soul (as sin's true nature is),
Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

[Enter Ophelia distracted.]


OPHELIA
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?

QUEEN  How now, Ophelia?

OPHELIA [sings]
	How should I your true love know
	   From another one?
	By his cockle hat and staff
	   And his sandal shoon.

QUEEN
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

OPHELIA  Say you? Nay, pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	He is dead and gone, lady,
	   He is dead and gone;
	At his head a grass-green turf,
	   At his heels a stone.
Oh, ho!

QUEEN  Nay, but Ophelia--

OPHELIA  Pray you, mark.
[Sings.]	White his shroud as the mountain snow--

[Enter King.]


QUEEN  Alas, look here, my lord.

OPHELIA [sings]
	   Larded all with sweet flowers;
	Which bewept to the ground did not go
	   With true-love showers.

KING  How do you, pretty lady?

OPHELIA  Well, God dild you. They say the owl was a
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are but
know not what we may be. God be at your table.

KING  Conceit upon her father.

OPHELIA  Pray let's have no words of this, but when
they ask you what it means, say you this:
[Sings.]	Tomorrow is Saint Valentine's day,
	   All in the morning betime,
	And I a maid at your window,
	   To be your Valentine.
	Then up he rose and donned his clothes
	   And dupped the chamber door,
	Let in the maid, that out a maid
	   Never departed more.

KING  Pretty Ophelia--

OPHELIA
Indeed, without an oath, I'll make an end on 't:
[Sings.]	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
	   Alack and fie for shame,
	Young men will do 't, if they come to 't;
	   By Cock, they are to blame.
	Quoth she "Before you tumbled me,
	   You promised me to wed."
He answers:
	"So would I 'a done, by yonder sun,
	   An thou hadst not come to my bed."

KING  How long hath she been thus?

OPHELIA  I hope all will be well. We must be patient,
but I cannot choose but weep to think they would
lay him i' th' cold ground. My brother shall know of
it. And so I thank you for your good counsel. Come,
my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet
ladies, good night, good night.	[She exits.]

KING
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
[Horatio exits.]
O, this is the poison of deep grief. It springs
All from her father's death, and now behold!
O Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows come, they come not single spies,
But in battalions: first, her father slain;
Next, your son gone, and he most violent author
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and
whispers
For good Polonius' death, and we have done but
greenly
In hugger-mugger to inter him; poor Ophelia
Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her brother is in secret come from France,
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent speeches of his father's death,
Wherein necessity, of matter beggared,
Will nothing stick our person to arraign
In ear and ear. O, my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
Gives me superfluous death.
[A noise within.]

QUEEN  Alack, what noise is this?

KING  Attend!
Where is my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

[Enter a Messenger.]

What is the matter?

MESSENGER  Save yourself, my lord.
The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impiteous haste
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him "lord,"
And, as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry "Choose we, Laertes shall be king!"
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
"Laertes shall be king! Laertes king!"
[A noise within.]

QUEEN
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.
O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

KING  The doors are broke.

[Enter Laertes with others.
]

LAERTES
Where is this king?--Sirs, stand you all without.

ALL  No, let's come in!

LAERTES  I pray you, give me leave.

ALL  We will, we will.

LAERTES
I thank you. Keep the door. [Followers exit.] O, thou
vile king,
Give me my father!

QUEEN  Calmly, good Laertes.

LAERTES
That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me
bastard,
Cries "cuckold" to my father, brands the harlot
Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow
Of my true mother.

KING  What is the cause, Laertes,
That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?--
Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
That treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will.--Tell me, Laertes,
Why thou art thus incensed.--Let him go,
Gertrude.--
Speak, man.

LAERTES  Where is my father?

KING  Dead.

QUEEN
But not by him.

KING  Let him demand his fill.

LAERTES
How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with.
To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!
Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged
Most throughly for my father.

KING  Who shall stay you?

LAERTES  My will, not all the world.
And for my means, I'll husband them so well
They shall go far with little.

KING  Good Laertes,
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear father, is 't writ in your revenge
That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and
foe,
Winner and loser?

LAERTES  None but his enemies.

KING  Will you know them, then?

LAERTES
To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms
And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
Repast them with my blood.

KING  Why, now you speak
Like a good child and a true gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your father's death
And am most sensibly in grief for it,
It shall as level to your judgment 'pear
As day does to your eye.

  [A noise within:] "Let her come in!"

LAERTES  How now, what noise is that?

[Enter Ophelia.]

O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight
Till our scale turn the beam! O rose of May,
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
O heavens, is 't possible a young maid's wits
Should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and, where 'tis fine,
It sends some precious instance of itself
After the thing it loves.

OPHELIA [sings]
	They bore him barefaced on the bier,
	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,
	And in his grave rained many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove.

LAERTES
Hadst thou thy wits and didst persuade revenge,
It could not move thus.

OPHELIA  You must sing "A-down a-down"--and you
"Call him a-down-a."--O, how the wheel becomes
it! It is the false steward that stole his master's
daughter.

LAERTES  This nothing's more than matter.

OPHELIA  There's rosemary, that's for remembrance.
Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies,
that's for thoughts.

LAERTES  A document in madness: thoughts and remembrance
fitted.

OPHELIA  There's fennel for you, and columbines.
There's rue for you, and here's some for me; we
may call it herb of grace o' Sundays. You must wear
your rue with a difference. There's a daisy. I would
give you some violets, but they withered all when
my father died. They say he made a good end.
[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

LAERTES
Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself
She turns to favor and to prettiness.

OPHELIA [sings]
	And will he not come again?
	And will he not come again?
	   No, no, he is dead.
	   Go to thy deathbed.
	He never will come again.

	His beard was as white as snow,
	All flaxen was his poll.
	   He is gone, he is gone,
	   And we cast away moan.
	God 'a mercy on his soul.
And of all Christians' souls, I pray God. God be wi'
you.	[She exits.]

LAERTES  Do you see this, O God?

KING
Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
They find us touched, we will our kingdom give,
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
To you in satisfaction; but if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to us,
And we shall jointly labor with your soul
To give it due content.

LAERTES  Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral
(No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
No noble rite nor formal ostentation)
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
That I must call 't in question.

KING  So you shall,
And where th' offense is, let the great ax fall.
I pray you, go with me.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Horatio and others.]


HORATIO  What are they that would speak with me?

GENTLEMAN  Seafaring men, sir. They say they have
letters for you.

HORATIO  Let them come in. [Gentleman exits.] I do not
know from what part of the world I should be
greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

[Enter Sailors.]


SAILOR  God bless you, sir.

HORATIO  Let Him bless thee too.

SAILOR  He shall, sir, an 't please Him. There's a letter
for you, sir. It came from th' ambassador that was
bound for England--if your name be Horatio, as I
am let to know it is.	[He hands Horatio a letter.]

HORATIO [reads the letter]  Horatio, when thou shalt have
overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the
King. They have letters for him. Ere we were two days
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave
us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
a compelled valor, and in the grapple I boarded them.
On the instant, they got clear of our ship; so I alone
became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like
thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did: I am to
do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters
I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed
as thou wouldst fly death. I have words to speak in
thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows
will bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
hold their course for England; of them I have
much to tell thee. Farewell.
He that thou knowest thine,
Hamlet.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters
And do 't the speedier that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter King and Laertes.]


KING
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain
Pursued my life.

LAERTES  It well appears. But tell me
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So criminal and so capital in nature,
As by your safety, greatness, wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up.

KING  O, for two special reasons,
Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinewed,
But yet to me they're strong. The Queen his mother
Lives almost by his looks, and for myself
(My virtue or my plague, be it either which),
She is so conjunctive to my life and soul
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
I could not but by her. The other motive
Why to a public count I might not go
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
Work like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,
Too slightly timbered for so loud a wind,
Would have reverted to my bow again,
But not where I have aimed them.

LAERTES
And so have I a noble father lost,
A sister driven into desp'rate terms,
Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Stood challenger on mount of all the age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.

KING
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
That we can let our beard be shook with danger
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I loved your father, and we love ourself,
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

[Enter a Messenger with letters.]

How now? What news?

MESSENGER  Letters, my lord, from
Hamlet.
These to your Majesty, this to the Queen.

KING  From Hamlet? Who brought them?

MESSENGER
Sailors, my lord, they say. I saw them not.
They were given me by Claudio. He received them
Of him that brought them.

KING  Laertes, you shall hear
them.--
Leave us.	[Messenger exits.]
[Reads.] High and mighty, you shall know I am set
naked on your kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to
see your kingly eyes, when I shall (first asking your
pardon) thereunto recount the occasion of my sudden
and more strange return. Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse and no such thing?

LAERTES  Know you the hand?

KING  'Tis Hamlet's character. "Naked"--
And in a postscript here, he says "alone."
Can you advise me?

LAERTES
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth
"Thus didst thou."

KING  If it be so, Laertes
(As how should it be so? how otherwise?),
Will you be ruled by me?

LAERTES  Ay, my lord,
So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

KING
To thine own peace. If he be now returned,
As checking at his voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it, I will work him
To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice
And call it accident.

LAERTES  My lord, I will be ruled,
The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.

KING  It falls right.
You have been talked of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts
Did not together pluck such envy from him
As did that one, and that, in my regard,
Of the unworthiest siege.

LAERTES  What part is that, my lord?

KING
A very ribbon in the cap of youth--
Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes
The light and careless livery that it wears
Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
Importing health and graveness. Two months since
Here was a gentleman of Normandy.
I have seen myself, and served against, the French,
And they can well on horseback, but this gallant
Had witchcraft in 't. He grew unto his seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
As had he been encorpsed and demi-natured
With the brave beast. So far he topped my thought
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks
Come short of what he did.

LAERTES  A Norman was 't?

KING  A Norman.

LAERTES
Upon my life, Lamord.

KING  The very same.

LAERTES
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed
And gem of all the nation.

KING  He made confession of you
And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defense,
And for your rapier most especial,
That he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
If one could match you. The 'scrimers of their
nation
He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
That he could nothing do but wish and beg
Your sudden coming-o'er, to play with you.
Now out of this--

LAERTES  What out of this, my lord?

KING
Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?

LAERTES  Why ask you this?

KING
Not that I think you did not love your father,
But that I know love is begun by time
And that I see, in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,
And nothing is at a like goodness still;
For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,
Dies in his own too-much. That we would do
We should do when we would; for this "would"
changes
And hath abatements and delays as many
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
And then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh,
That hurts by easing. But to the quick of th' ulcer:
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake
To show yourself indeed your father's son
More than in words?

LAERTES  To cut his throat i' th' church.

KING
No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;
Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
Will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Hamlet, returned, shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you; bring you, in fine,
together
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice
Requite him for your father.

LAERTES  I will do 't,
And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank
So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
Collected from all simples that have virtue
Under the moon, can save the thing from death
That is but scratched withal. I'll touch my point
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.

KING  Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad
performance,
'Twere better not assayed. Therefore this project
Should have a back or second that might hold
If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings--
I ha 't!
When in your motion you are hot and dry
(As make your bouts more violent to that end)
And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared
him
A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there.--But stay, what
noise?

[Enter Queen.]


QUEEN
One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow. Your sister's drowned, Laertes.

LAERTES  Drowned? O, where?

QUEEN
There is a willow grows askant the brook
That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
Therewith fantastic garlands did she make
Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
But our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call
them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old lauds,
As one incapable of her own distress
Or like a creature native and endued
Unto that element. But long it could not be
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay
To muddy death.

LAERTES  Alas, then she is drowned.

QUEEN  Drowned, drowned.

LAERTES
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears. But yet
It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
The woman will be out.--Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech o' fire that fain would blaze,
But that this folly drowns it.	[He exits.]

KING  Let's follow, Gertrude.
How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again.
Therefore, let's follow.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Gravedigger and Another.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Is she to be buried in Christian burial,
when she willfully seeks her own salvation?

OTHER  I tell thee she is. Therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her and finds it
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  How can that be, unless she drowned
herself in her own defense?

OTHER  Why, 'tis found so.

GRAVEDIGGER  It must be se offendendo; it cannot be
else. For here lies the point: if I drown myself
wittingly, it argues an act, and an act hath three
branches--it is to act, to do, to perform. Argal, she
drowned herself wittingly.

OTHER  Nay, but hear you, goodman delver--

GRAVEDIGGER  Give me leave. Here lies the water;
good. Here stands the man; good. If the man go to
this water and drown himself, it is (will he, nill he)
he goes; mark you that. But if the water come to him
and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he
that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his
own life.

OTHER  But is this law?

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, marry, is 't--crowner's 'quest law.

OTHER  Will you ha' the truth on 't? If this had not been
a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
Christian burial.

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, there thou sayst. And the more
pity that great folk should have count'nance in this
world to drown or hang themselves more than
their even-Christian. Come, my spade. There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and
grave-makers. They hold up Adam's profession.

OTHER  Was he a gentleman?

GRAVEDIGGER  He was the first that ever bore arms.

OTHER  Why, he had none.

GRAVEDIGGER  What, art a heathen? How dost thou
understand the scripture? The scripture says Adam
digged. Could he dig without arms? I'll put another
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself--

OTHER  Go to!

GRAVEDIGGER  What is he that builds stronger than
either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

OTHER  The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
thousand tenants.

GRAVEDIGGER  I like thy wit well, in good faith. The
gallows does well. But how does it well? It does
well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say the
gallows is built stronger than the church. Argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. To 't again, come.

OTHER  "Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
or a carpenter?"

GRAVEDIGGER  Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

OTHER  Marry, now I can tell.

GRAVEDIGGER  To 't.

OTHER  Mass, I cannot tell.

[Enter Hamlet and Horatio afar off.]


GRAVEDIGGER  Cudgel thy brains no more about it,
for your dull ass will not mend his pace with
beating. And, when you are asked this question
next, say "a grave-maker." The houses he makes
lasts till doomsday. Go, get thee in, and fetch me a
stoup of liquor.
[The Other Man exits
and the Gravedigger digs and sings.]
	In youth when I did love, did love,
	   Methought it was very sweet
	To contract--O--the time for--a--my behove,
	   O, methought there--a--was nothing--a--meet.

HAMLET  Has this fellow no feeling of his business? He
sings in grave-making.

HORATIO  Custom hath made it in him a property of
easiness.

HAMLET  'Tis e'en so. The hand of little employment
hath the daintier sense.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	But age with his stealing steps
	Hath clawed me in his clutch,
	And hath shipped me into the land,
	As if I had never been such.
[He digs up a skull.]

HAMLET  That skull had a tongue in it and could sing
once. How the knave jowls it to the ground as if
'twere Cain's jawbone, that did the first murder!
This might be the pate of a politician which this ass
now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent God,
might it not?

HORATIO  It might, my lord.

HAMLET  Or of a courtier, which could say "Good
morrow, sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?"
This might be my Lord Such-a-one that praised my
Lord Such-a-one's horse when he went to beg it,
might it not?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, e'en so. And now my Lady Worm's,
chapless and knocked about the mazard with a
sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution, an we had
the trick to see 't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with them? Mine
ache to think on 't.

GRAVEDIGGER [sings]
	A pickax and a spade, a spade,
	For and a shrouding sheet,
	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.
[He digs up more skulls.]

HAMLET  There's another. Why may not that be the
skull of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his
quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? Why
does he suffer this mad knave now to knock him
about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell
him of his action of battery? Hum, this fellow might
be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines and the
recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full
of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more
of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very
conveyances of his lands will scarcely lie in this box,
and must th' inheritor himself have no more, ha?

HORATIO  Not a jot more, my lord.

HAMLET  Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

HORATIO  Ay, my lord, and of calves' skins too.

HAMLET  They are sheep and calves which seek out
assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow.--
Whose grave's this, sirrah?

GRAVEDIGGER  Mine, sir.
[Sings.]	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

HAMLET  I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in 't.

GRAVEDIGGER  You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis
not yours. For my part, I do not lie in 't, yet it is
mine.

HAMLET  Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine.
'Tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou
liest.

GRAVEDIGGER  'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again
from me to you.

HAMLET  What man dost thou dig it for?

GRAVEDIGGER  For no man, sir.

HAMLET  What woman then?

GRAVEDIGGER  For none, neither.

HAMLET  Who is to be buried in 't?

GRAVEDIGGER  One that was a woman, sir, but, rest
her soul, she's dead.

HAMLET  How absolute the knave is! We must speak by
the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the
Lord, Horatio, this three years I have took note of
it: the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
galls his kibe.--How long hast thou been
grave-maker?

GRAVEDIGGER  Of all the days i' th' year, I came to 't
that day that our last King Hamlet overcame
Fortinbras.

HAMLET  How long is that since?

GRAVEDIGGER  Cannot you tell that? Every fool can
tell that. It was that very day that young Hamlet
was born--he that is mad, and sent into England.

HAMLET  Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, because he was mad. He shall
recover his wits there. Or if he do not, 'tis no great
matter there.

HAMLET  Why?

GRAVEDIGGER  'Twill not be seen in him there. There
the men are as mad as he.

HAMLET  How came he mad?

GRAVEDIGGER  Very strangely, they say.

HAMLET  How "strangely"?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

HAMLET  Upon what ground?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, here in Denmark. I have been
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

HAMLET  How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?

GRAVEDIGGER  Faith, if he be not rotten before he die
(as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will
scarce hold the laying in), he will last you some
eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine
year.

HAMLET  Why he more than another?

GRAVEDIGGER  Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his
trade that he will keep out water a great while; and
your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead
body. Here's a skull now hath lien you i' th' earth
three-and-twenty years.

HAMLET  Whose was it?

GRAVEDIGGER  A whoreson mad fellow's it was.
Whose do you think it was?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not.

GRAVEDIGGER  A pestilence on him for a mad rogue!
He poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.
This same skull, sir, was, sir, Yorick's skull, the
King's jester.

HAMLET  This?

GRAVEDIGGER  E'en that.

HAMLET, [taking the skull]  Let me see. Alas, poor
Yorick! I knew him, Horatio--a fellow of infinite
jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath bore me on his
back a thousand times, and now how abhorred in
my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung
those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.
Where be your gibes now? your gambols? your
songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to
set the table on a roar? Not one now to mock your
own grinning? Quite chapfallen? Now get you to my
lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favor she must come. Make her laugh
at that.--Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

HORATIO  What's that, my lord?

HAMLET  Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this
fashion i' th' earth?

HORATIO  E'en so.

HAMLET  And smelt so? Pah!	[He puts the skull down.]

HORATIO  E'en so, my lord.

HAMLET  To what base uses we may return, Horatio!
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of
Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?

HORATIO  'Twere to consider too curiously to consider
so.

HAMLET  No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither,
with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it, as
thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander
returneth to dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he
was converted might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!

[Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords attendant, and the
corpse of Ophelia, with a Doctor of Divinity.]

But soft, but soft awhile! Here comes the King,
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
The corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
Fordo its own life. 'Twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile and mark.	[They step aside.]

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

HAMLET  That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.

LAERTES  What ceremony else?

DOCTOR
Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
As we have warranty. Her death was doubtful,
And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified been lodged
Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her.
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants,
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of bell and burial.

LAERTES
Must there no more be done?

DOCTOR  No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
To sing a requiem and such rest to her
As to peace-parted souls.

LAERTES  Lay her i' th' earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
A minist'ring angel shall my sister be
When thou liest howling.

HAMLET, [to Horatio]  What, the fair Ophelia?

QUEEN  Sweets to the sweet, farewell!
[She scatters flowers.]
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
I thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid,
And not have strewed thy grave.

LAERTES  O, treble woe
Fall ten times treble on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
Deprived thee of!--Hold off the earth awhile,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms.
[Leaps in the grave.]
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
Till of this flat a mountain you have made
T' o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head
Of blue Olympus.

HAMLET, [advancing]
What is he whose grief
Bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wand'ring stars and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.

LAERTES, [coming out of the grave]
The devil take thy soul!

HAMLET  Thou pray'st not well.	[They grapple.]
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat,
For though I am not splenitive and rash,
Yet have I in me something dangerous,
Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.

KING  Pluck them asunder.

QUEEN  Hamlet! Hamlet!

ALL  Gentlemen!

HORATIO  Good my lord, be quiet.
[Hamlet and Laertes are separated.]

HAMLET
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme
Until my eyelids will no longer wag!

QUEEN  O my son, what theme?

HAMLET
I loved Ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Could not with all their quantity of love
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

KING  O, he is mad, Laertes!

QUEEN  For love of God, forbear him.

HAMLET  'Swounds, show me what thou 't do.
Woo't weep, woo't fight, woo't fast, woo't tear
thyself,
Woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile?
I'll do 't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou 'lt mouth,
I'll rant as well as thou.

QUEEN  This is mere madness;
And thus awhile the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
His silence will sit drooping.

HAMLET  Hear you, sir,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loved you ever. But it is no matter.
Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
[Horatio exits.]
[To Laertes.] Strengthen your patience in our last
night's speech.
We'll put the matter to the present push.--
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.--
This grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet thereby shall we see.
Till then in patience our proceeding be.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and Horatio.]


HAMLET
So much for this, sir. Now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?

HORATIO  Remember it, my lord!

HAMLET
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
That would not let me sleep. Methought I lay
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly--
And praised be rashness for it; let us know,
Our indiscretion sometime serves us well
When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn
us
There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will--

HORATIO  That is most
certain.

HAMLET  Up from my cabin,
My sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold
(My fears forgetting manners) to unfold
Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,
A royal knavery--an exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reasons
Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
With--ho!--such bugs and goblins in my life,
That on the supervise, no leisure bated,
No, not to stay the grinding of the ax,
My head should be struck off.

HORATIO  Is 't possible?

HAMLET
Here's the commission. Read it at more leisure.
[Handing him a paper.]
But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?

HORATIO  I beseech you.

HAMLET
Being thus benetted round with villainies,
Or I could make a prologue to my brains,
They had begun the play. I sat me down,
Devised a new commission, wrote it fair--
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
A baseness to write fair, and labored much
How to forget that learning; but, sir, now
It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
Th' effect of what I wrote?

HORATIO  Ay, good my lord.

HAMLET
An earnest conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful tributary,
As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
And many suchlike ases of great charge,
That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should those bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.

HORATIO  How was this sealed?

HAMLET
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
Which was the model of that Danish seal;
Folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
Subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it
safely,
The changeling never known. Now, the next day
Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Thou knowest already.

HORATIO
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't.

HAMLET
Why, man, they did make love to this employment.
They are not near my conscience. Their defeat
Does by their own insinuation grow.
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
Between the pass and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.

HORATIO  Why, what a king is this!

HAMLET
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon--
He that hath killed my king and whored my mother,
Popped in between th' election and my hopes,
Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage--is 't not perfect
conscience
To quit him with this arm? And is 't not to be
damned
To let this canker of our nature come
In further evil?

HORATIO
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.

HAMLET
It will be short. The interim's mine,
And a man's life's no more than to say "one."
But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot myself,
For by the image of my cause I see
The portraiture of his. I'll court his favors.
But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a tow'ring passion.

HORATIO  Peace, who comes here?

[Enter Osric, a courtier.]


OSRIC  Your Lordship is right welcome back to
Denmark.

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, sir. [Aside to Horatio.]
Dost know this waterfly?

HORATIO, [aside to Hamlet]  No, my good lord.

HAMLET, [aside to Horatio]  Thy state is the more gracious,
for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath much
land, and fertile. Let a beast be lord of beasts and his
crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'Tis a chough,
but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

OSRIC  Sweet lord, if your Lordship were at leisure, I
should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.

HAMLET  I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use: 'tis for the
head.

OSRIC  I thank your Lordship; it is very hot.

HAMLET  No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
northerly.

OSRIC  It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

HAMLET  But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for
my complexion.

OSRIC  Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as
'twere--I cannot tell how. My lord, his Majesty
bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager
on your head. Sir, this is the matter--

HAMLET  I beseech you, remember. [He motions to
Osric to put on his hat.]

OSRIC  Nay, good my lord, for my ease, in good faith.
Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes--believe
me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
continent of what part a gentleman would see.

HAMLET  Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in
you, though I know to divide him inventorially
would dozy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but
yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his
mirror, and who else would trace him, his umbrage,
nothing more.

OSRIC  Your Lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

HAMLET  The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the
gentleman in our more rawer breath?

OSRIC  Sir?

HORATIO  Is 't not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will to 't, sir, really.

HAMLET, [to Osric]  What imports the nomination of
this gentleman?

OSRIC  Of Laertes?

HORATIO  His purse is empty already; all 's golden words
are spent.

HAMLET  Of him, sir.

OSRIC  I know you are not ignorant--

HAMLET  I would you did, sir. Yet, in faith, if you did, it
would not much approve me. Well, sir?

OSRIC  You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes
is--

HAMLET  I dare not confess that, lest I should compare
with him in excellence. But to know a man well
were to know himself.

OSRIC  I mean, sir, for his weapon. But in the imputation
laid on him by them, in his meed he's
unfellowed.

HAMLET  What's his weapon?

OSRIC  Rapier and dagger.

HAMLET  That's two of his weapons. But, well--

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
horses, against the which he has impawned, as I
take it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and
of very liberal conceit.

HAMLET  What call you the "carriages"?

HORATIO  I knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.

OSRIC  The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

HAMLET  The phrase would be more germane to the
matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides. I
would it might be "hangers" till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages--
that's the French bet against the Danish. Why is this
all "impawned," as you call it?

OSRIC  The King, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen
passes between yourself and him, he shall not
exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your
Lordship would vouchsafe the answer.

HAMLET  How if I answer no?

OSRIC  I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
in trial.

HAMLET  Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his
Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. Let
the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose, I will win for him, an I can.
If not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd
hits.

OSRIC  Shall I deliver you e'en so?

HAMLET  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your
nature will.

OSRIC  I commend my duty to your Lordship.

HAMLET  Yours. [Osric exits.] He does well to commend
it himself. There are no tongues else for 's
turn.

HORATIO  This lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head.

HAMLET  He did comply, sir, with his dug before he
sucked it. Thus has he (and many more of the same
breed that I know the drossy age dotes on) only got
the tune of the time, and, out of an habit of
encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries
them through and through the most fanned
and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to
their trial, the bubbles are out.

[Enter a Lord.]


LORD  My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by
young Osric, who brings back to him that you
attend him in the hall. He sends to know if your
pleasure hold to play with Laertes, or that you will
take longer time.

HAMLET  I am constant to my purposes. They follow
the King's pleasure. If his fitness speaks, mine is
ready now or whensoever, provided I be so able as
now.

LORD  The King and Queen and all are coming down.

HAMLET  In happy time.

LORD  The Queen desires you to use some gentle
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

HAMLET  She well instructs me.	[Lord exits.]

HORATIO  You will lose, my lord.

HAMLET  I do not think so. Since he went into France, I
have been in continual practice. I shall win at the
odds; but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
about my heart. But it is no matter.

HORATIO  Nay, good my lord--

HAMLET  It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of
gaingiving as would perhaps trouble a woman.

HORATIO  If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will
forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.

HAMLET  Not a whit. We defy augury. There is a
special providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be
now, 'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The
readiness is all. Since no man of aught he leaves
knows, what is 't to leave betimes? Let be.

[A table prepared. Enter Trumpets, Drums, and Officers
with cushions, King, Queen, Osric, and all the state,
foils, daggers, flagons of wine, and Laertes.]


KING
Come, Hamlet, come and take this hand from me.
[He puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's.]

HAMLET, [to Laertes]
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
But pardon 't as you are a gentleman. This presence
knows,
And you must needs have heard, how I am punished
With a sore distraction. What I have done
That might your nature, honor, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
Was 't Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not; Hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If 't be so,
Hamlet is of the faction that is wronged;
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts
That I have shot my arrow o'er the house
And hurt my brother.

LAERTES  I am satisfied in nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my revenge; but in my terms of honor
I stand aloof and will no reconcilement
Till by some elder masters of known honor
I have a voice and precedent of peace
To keep my name ungored. But till that time
I do receive your offered love like love
And will not wrong it.

HAMLET  I embrace it freely
And will this brothers' wager frankly play.--
Give us the foils. Come on.

LAERTES  Come, one for me.

HAMLET
I'll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance
Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.

LAERTES  You mock me, sir.

HAMLET  No, by this hand.

KING
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
You know the wager?

HAMLET  Very well, my lord.
Your Grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.

KING
I do not fear it; I have seen you both.
But, since he is better, we have therefore odds.

LAERTES
This is too heavy. Let me see another.

HAMLET
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

OSRIC  Ay, my good lord.
[Prepare to play.]

KING
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.--
If Hamlet give the first or second hit
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the battlements their ordnance fire.
The King shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,
And in the cup an union shall he throw,
Richer than that which four successive kings
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,
And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
"Now the King drinks to Hamlet." Come, begin.
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
[Trumpets the while.]

HAMLET  Come on, sir.

LAERTES  Come, my lord.	[They play.]

HAMLET  One.

LAERTES  No.

HAMLET  Judgment!

OSRIC  A hit, a very palpable hit.

LAERTES  Well, again.

KING
Stay, give me drink.--Hamlet, this pearl is thine.
Here's to thy health.
[He drinks and then drops the pearl in the cup.]
[Drum, trumpets, and shot.]
Give him the cup.

HAMLET
I'll play this bout first. Set it by awhile.
Come. [They play.] Another hit. What say you?

LAERTES
A touch, a touch. I do confess 't.

KING
Our son shall win.

QUEEN  He's fat and scant of breath.--
Here, Hamlet, take my napkin; rub thy brows.
The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
[She lifts the cup.]

HAMLET  Good madam.

KING  Gertrude, do not drink.

QUEEN
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.	[She drinks.]

KING, [aside]
It is the poisoned cup. It is too late.

HAMLET
I dare not drink yet, madam--by and by.

QUEEN  Come, let me wipe thy face.

LAERTES, [to Claudius]
My lord, I'll hit him now.

KING  I do not think 't.

LAERTES, [aside]
And yet it is almost against my conscience.

HAMLET
Come, for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.
I pray you pass with your best violence.
I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

LAERTES  Say you so? Come on.	[Play.]

OSRIC  Nothing neither way.

LAERTES  Have at you now!
[Laertes wounds Hamlet. Then in scuffling they change
rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes.]

KING  Part them. They are incensed.

HAMLET  Nay, come again.
[The Queen falls.]

OSRIC  Look to the Queen there, ho!

HORATIO
They bleed on both sides.--How is it, my lord?

OSRIC  How is 't, Laertes?

LAERTES
Why as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
[He falls.]
I am justly killed with mine own treachery.

HAMLET
How does the Queen?

KING  She swoons to see them bleed.

QUEEN
No, no, the drink, the drink! O, my dear Hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poisoned.	[She dies.]

HAMLET
O villainy! Ho! Let the door be locked.	[Osric exits.]
Treachery! Seek it out.

LAERTES
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.
No med'cine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour's life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
Unbated and envenomed. The foul practice
Hath turned itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
Never to rise again. Thy mother's poisoned.
I can no more. The King, the King's to blame.

HAMLET
The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy
work.	[Hurts the King.]

ALL  Treason, treason!

KING
O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.

HAMLET
Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
[Forcing him to drink the poison.]
Follow my mother.	[King dies.]

LAERTES  He is justly served.
It is a poison tempered by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.	[Dies.]

HAMLET
Heaven make thee free of it. I follow thee.--
I am dead, Horatio.--Wretched queen, adieu.--
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
That are but mutes or audience to this act,
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
Is strict in his arrest), O, I could tell you--
But let it be.--Horatio, I am dead.
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
To the unsatisfied.

HORATIO  Never believe it.
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Here's yet some liquor left.	[He picks up the cup.]

HAMLET  As thou 'rt a man,
Give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, I'll ha 't.
O God, Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall I leave behind
me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story.
[A march afar off and shot within.]
What warlike noise is this?

[Enter Osric.]


OSRIC
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
To th' ambassadors of England gives
This warlike volley.

HAMLET  O, I die, Horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from England.
But I do prophesy th' election lights
On Fortinbras; he has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Which have solicited--the rest is silence.
O, O, O, O!	[Dies.]

HORATIO
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.
[March within.]
Why does the drum come hither?

[Enter Fortinbras with the English Ambassadors with
Drum, Colors, and Attendants.]


FORTINBRAS  Where is this sight?

HORATIO  What is it you would see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

FORTINBRAS
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud Death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal cell
That thou so many princes at a shot
So bloodily hast struck?

AMBASSADOR  The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?

HORATIO  Not from his
mouth,
Had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to th' yet unknowing world
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.

FORTINBRAS  Let us haste to hear it
And call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

HORATIO
Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
And from his mouth whose voice will draw on
more.
But let this same be presently performed
Even while men's minds are wild, lest more
mischance
On plots and errors happen.

FORTINBRAS  Let four captains
Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on,
To have proved most royal; and for his passage,
The soldier's music and the rite of war
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
Becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
[They exit, marching, after the which, a peal of
ordnance are shot off.]